thanks everyone for joining I'm
delighted to be joined here today by uh
Professor Ken Stanley Ken is a computer
scientist researching artificial
intelligence and he's also the co-author
of an awesome book that we really love
called why greatness cannot be planned
the myth of the objective and the idea
for this talk is to discuss the
implications of his book specifically
for education and learning and so I
brought along two of uh the biggest uh
Kenneth Stanley super nerds that I know
uh Moritz and Alex to help me ask some
questions during the first uh sort of
moderated part of the talk which will be
around 45 minutes and then at the end
there'll be an opportunity to ask your
own questions if you have them so yeah
I'm reminded this event is being
recorded So if you don't want to have
your video recorded or your voice
recorded uh you can write your questions
in the chat and someone else will read
them out for you uh but yeah I can I'm
really delighted to have you here and um
I guess we can maybe kick this off by uh
sort of framing the discussion today
could you sort of introduce your
argument against objectives and how it
relates to the education system
specifically
um yeah so
um yeah the book why greatness cannot be
planned is
yeah it has a kind of a history and
artificial intelligence because I am an
artificial intelligence researcher and
machine learning researcher and we were
looking at algorithms and doing
experiments that were showing this what
I thought was like a really kind of
mind-blowing insight which is that
sometimes setting an objective actually
makes it less likely that you'll achieve
it or to actually broaden that point
setting an objective can actually make
it less likely that you achieve anything
interesting at all
um because you become
um sort of single-mindedly focused on a
metric that's with respect to the
objective and that metric can be
deceptive it's basically what it means
is you can miss all the stepping stones
that can lead to other places which
would be really great to have
um it might actually get you to where
you'd want to go but also to other
places that you didn't realize you could
go because you're so myopically focused
um and we were seeing uh results that
showed this phenomenon in AI experiments
including experiments with people in the
loop like one of them is called pick
reader
um and so we saw this like really
counterintuitive phenomenon where you
would see that like people couldn't get
to things if they were trying but they
could if they weren't trying or they
could find really interesting stuff if
they weren't trying to find anything in
particular
um and that principle at first sort of
observed an AI like it led to like a new
algorithm which is What's called the
novelty search algorithm or novelty
search
um and um and it was it led to a lot of
kind of ideas in artificial intelligence
including also like quality diversity
algorithms like a whole field now
um and it was kind of controversial
there
um so I got to talk to a lot of people
about it because people were interested
in what are the implications of this if
you think about it it goes a little bit
against the usual grain of what happens
to machine learning where usually you
think of it as we have an objective
function and we measure problems with
respect to the objective and actually to
help with intuition just like why would
that not work in general if you think
about it if you have a complex problem
then the stepping stones that lead you
to where you hope to go won't look like
the solution or the objective
um and if you think about it it's like
the definition of complex you know it's
almost like a truism like if the
Stepping Stones actually resembled where
you want to go then it's not a complex
problem or it's not a hard problem it's
actually easy so you have no problem but
we're interested in problems that are
hard so in those it's by definition
almost the stepping stones won't
resemble where you want to go well if
the Stepping Stones don't resemble where
you want to go that means that your
metrics will lead you astray because
metrics usually are about how are you
doing with respect to where you want to
go so you think like does do you
increasingly resemble where you want to
go which usually would be some kind of
score
um and that score would go up as you get
closer but the thing is the Stepping
Stones don't resemble the objective and
therefore like it actually it's
deceptive to actually follow that score
up the gradient
um or if you want to think about it
minimizing loss would be deceptive to
follow it down
um and so so
um this Insight at first like it was
interesting in machine learning
discussions but then it was kind of
obvious
um that actually this is interesting to
discuss outside of machine learning and
including by Machine learning
researchers who I was talking to because
they would be like wait a second like
what does this mean for me like if I'm
pursuing objectives or like what does it
mean for my department or my school or
maybe like Society at large or every
institution on Earth and it's sort of
like you know our culture is completely
saturated and objective driven types of
Pursuits like if you're in Silicon
Valley you're like stuck with okrs all
over the place but you know if you're in
in research like you have to declare to
when you're applying for funding you
have to declare your objective
um and then sort of say like how are you
going to reach it and then they can't
like make that clear then you probably
won't get any money and it's just all
over the place in like every industry
this is absolutely
um ubiquitous and so um I started to uh
you know talk to some groups outside of
computer science after a while like
somebody saw me speak at a computer
science conference and invited me for
example to speak to some artists and I
started to realize that this Insight
which I started to call the objective
Paradox um having an objective can
actually stop you from averaging your
objectives uh is like really important
to people
um and actually resonates at a deeper
level
um like I found that it was cathartic to
have these discussions for some people
because like with the artists they were
saying like uh look um I can't justify
what I'm doing to my parents I can't
justify it to my teachers like how am I
going to make money like nobody
understands why I'm doing this
um but the thing that I'm saying
basically says well actually sometimes
it's better not to have an explicit
objective and the alternative is
basically to follow what's interesting
and what is interesting is individual
and it's subjective so it makes
everybody uncomfortable because we want
to be totally objective about everything
but the thing is that we have a very
good nose as humans for the interesting
um and it depends on your background in
your field what's interesting to you is
different than what's interesting to me
um but we're afraid of this idea of
following the interesting but it is the
alternative because what it does is it
Reveals All the Stepping Stones
things that could be interesting are
Stepping Stones to other things we don't
know to what but they do lead to
interesting things and we're generally
as a society and as individuals very
afraid of following the scent of
interestingness and so
um one part of the so we end up writing
a whole book about this um myself and my
co-author Joe Layman who was a PhD
student at the time of mine
um we wrote this whole book why
greatness cannot be planned because we
kind of felt that um this is a really
unusual conversation like nobody's
talking about this you know but it's
like to me it seems like a pathological
aspect of society
um it's kind of interesting because it's
not even controversial like most things
that are problems are at least
controversial somebody is on one side
somebody's on the other side with
objectives there's no dissent like
there's no other side to it um like
everybody pretty much is bought into
this it's just like total Dogma
um and so like we thought like this is a
at least a conversation we should have
if not something that we should change
the Chris talk start talking to people
about this and we sort of realized that
like you can't do that through computer
science conferences like this is a
society-wide cultural issue
um so let's try to write a book and
that's why we wrote this book is about
all the gamut of things that this all
the implications that this has um for
society and one of those which is I
think something that I I like to have an
opportunity to talk about because I
think it's gotten some of the the least
attention is education there is a
chapter in the book on education and you
know it's really interesting because
I've I've had the opportunity because of
this book to talk to people in so many
different fields and I guess you could
say in different walks of life
um because it sort of applies to almost
anything that you do and so I've been
invited to many different communities
that are like way outside what normally
like someone in AI or something will be
talking to
um and and but one I haven't really is
education I don't really know what it is
there's something about like I really
strongly felt this has huge implications
for Education I'll tell you in one
second why I think that but I thought
these implications were really big and I
was really excited like that this would
probably stimulate some discussion there
um of the way that we both measure
individuals and institutions like
schools like how we decide if they're
performing well how we decide where
funding should go how we decide what
should be continued what should not be
continued like all the gatekeeping that
happens like it's all
um in question I think because it's also
objectively driven and um but somehow it
seems like the um the the whole like
um the whole the whole system around
education is more impervious somehow to
this kind of criticism than other like
other kinds of areas I found look very
open to like let's let's talk about this
this is important like this is really
like this is how we do business but
maybe we should change but education
I've had no bites at all
um and so to be a little more specific
though in education what the critique is
um like there's basically two there's
both the individual level and like I
said the institutional level but I think
it's best to start at the institutional
level because there I think there's kind
of a fiasco
um which is that like at least in the
U.S and I know this may be more
International audience but in the US
it's probably similar around the world
like we have a very objective way of
deciding whether institutions are
performing well
um and it's based on testing like
standardized testing and of course this
is appealing
um in the same for the same reason by
the way that objectives are appealing
across the entire culture because we're
all very scared that we might do
something that doesn't work and so by
being very strict and rigid and having
this assessment-based culture we make it
make ourselves feel like nothing's going
to go wrong everything is being rigidly
measured and strictly patrolled so that
nobody gets to do anything bad or walks
outside the lines and so like what
happens though is that we look at it as
an Institutional level which is like
basically saying that how is this whole
school doing with respect to the
standardized testing which we
periodically do because presumably and
it's very objective like what we hope
will happen across the entire nation
probably the entire world is that like
everybody will start to get a hundred on
every test that would be that's like
progress with an objective type of uh
heuristic so like we're hoping that you
know like there's a lot of
underperformers this year but next year
there'll be fewer and the next year to
be sure and I mean I it's not said
explicitly but I guess like the end goal
is that everybody will get 100
eventually like 10 years from now of
course this never works like the
education system is always in crisis and
you know the the way that we address it
is by trying to revise those
standardized tests like nobody questions
in the first place or there are
questions of course people do question
the whole system like some people don't
like it basically the general principle
that the standardized tests basically
just don't actually have anything to do
with what we need to do if our goal is
to actually improve the education system
which is very counter-intuitive it's
like the testing actually can stop you
from knowing whether you're getting
towards an actual really high level of
performance that's just totally
counterintuitive but if you think about
it it's just the objective Paradox we
stated just with respect to education
it's like having an objective can stop
you from actually achieving your
objective this is especially true in
complex spaces and very ambitious
problems and I would assert that like
actually trying to get like the entire
country to get 100 on every test is an
extremely ambitious problem
um and uh and like with totally unknown
Solutions it's very complex like how we
might do that because every you know
particular like situation in every
different School across like an entire
country or the entire world is unique
um and so like it's very hard to like
actually say anything General that can
like make all of this work all and lock
stuff together
um and yet we're following this this
objective Paradox as if like it actually
will work
um and so what I think is the
alternative which which I haven't like
focused on in this little preliminary
explanation is like when I started
following the interesting following
interestingness what it means when you
talk about education is that what we
really need is a Divergent system of
search like there's a need for
creativity like if you have like people
in like say a disadvantaged area who are
like not doing well in something like
the way to deal with that is unknown we
need creativity like there are different
methods but we need to try different
things when we find something
interesting that can percolate through
the system and by the system and maybe
it's like a social network like it can
percolate through the social network and
then that can basically transfer out and
we can see does it actually transfer or
maybe it doesn't transfer like the point
of open-ended systems and basically the
alternative to the objective Paradox is
this kind of Divergent search and it
means that like you're branching out
we're trying new things and so the
education system needs to work that way
if we want to actually get out of
whatever the local Optimum that we're in
right now is and this is frightening of
course because it sounds like there's no
oversight and this is like the thing we
all love and we want that security
blanket we want to control everybody
down to the last teacher like everybody
has to be following the system this
standardized to ensure that but the
thing to understand is that following
interestingness does not imply you can't
have any oversight at all it just
implies an entirely different system a
system which is more like a peer review
style system than like in top-down
overall globally controlled system you
can still have people look at what other
people are doing and that's actually the
that's actually helpful because that's
how IB is spread through a Divergent
network is that people will see each
other's ideas but if somebody's doing
something insane yeah of course we have
to do something about it and that will
get noted if like all the people who see
that like say wait a second there's a
problem going on over there this is
really too crazy for us and I kind of
call that a minimal Criterion like it's
okay in a Divergent process or an
open-ended process to have a minimal
Criterion which is like nobody can get
away with going below something but we
don't have to constantly be following a
gradient up like that is the objective
Paradox and we can forget about that
because it doesn't even work what we
need is to actually cause creativity
um to Blossom and this kind of minimal
Criterion driven search which is
actually how Evolution works if you
think about it like everybody has to be
able to have a baby basically walking
around as a human xerox machine or like
a living xerox machine in effect in
order for that lineage to continue
that's a very high minimal Criterion but
as long as you actually do that it
doesn't matter and nothing else matters
as long as you are that xerox machine
that makes a copy and so it's okay to
have miniment but like the problem is
we're climbing gradients to a maximum
which is impossible and won't work in
this kind of space I can apply a similar
critique at the individual level but I
should pause because I don't want to
just create make a big speech no that
was great now if it kind of feels like
uh you've had this bottled up almost
like you mentioned um uh while you're
talking that uh the implications of your
book for education and learning have
been has been something that hasn't
really been explored very much uh By the
people interviewing you and so on and
it's kind of surprising to me because
um everyone spends so long in education
nowadays like multiple Decades of their
lives are spent in education uh it's
probably one of the biggest areas in
which we systematically divert from
non-objective search and collecting
stepping stones and everything like that
um yeah I'm curious like what kinds of
feedback you've got from students
parents teachers people in the education
system who have skin in the game you
know what are they saying to you in
response to your book you mentioned that
um the idea of non-objective search it's
kind of it is intuitive but um uh I'm
curious to to like
how parents and people like that respond
like do they find it to be similarly
intuitive or do they find it to be kind
of like oh my God I'm going to send my
kid to just do whatever he wants and
that's really risky and uncertain
compared to the education system which
has this kind of safety blanket uh
effect
yeah so I think um like generally if I
talk to like I found generally anybody
responds positively I'd say like 95 of
people who I talk to you about these
ideas just in general not just about
education respond very positively to
them which actually surprised to me
because
um I thought it'd be super controversial
I'm basically saying we should get rid
of objectives for really ambitious stuff
I I never said that we should get rid of
them for everything like if you want to
lose weight like you know like you can
go on a diet like you get exercise like
that's reasonable kind of objective
stuff talking about ambitious stuff like
overall in the entire education system
or curing cancer or something like that
but so people generally agree and really
take Delight in it I found like people
really and so it was interesting to see
that even people inside of systems that
work that way who I think would think
are The Gatekeepers they don't even like
what they themselves are doing and they
kind of find kind of a level of disgust
with like the way the system works but
people generally feel kind of entrapped
in a system so they're like I don't want
to do things this way but I answer to
people
um who basically expect things to work
this way
um and it's very hard to disentangle all
of that you know there's very few people
who aren't answering to anybody at some
level
um and so you know ultimately somebody
answers to shareholders or CEOs or the
government or there's something there
um and so it becomes uh hard to change
things but people generally agree so
like that means that generally they
would agree as individuals with the
educational critique you know sort of
like parents like a lot of people in all
kinds of fields or parents if they would
generally agree and even allude to their
children that like they're doing things
a little more not objectively like
they're not forcing their kids to go
down a certain path and so forth
um but what I don't really have is like
actual people in the education system
itself uh telling me anything I just I
haven't heard from them um I haven't
um like I've heard from parents of
course students yeah like students
really like this you know you know we
all know that that like life is stifling
in the education system like it's not
really fun in the education system up
until you know maybe you get to the PHD
level like for me the first time I think
anybody really seemed to want me to do
what I thought was interesting was
probably around PhD that they'd actually
encourage you to think of your own
interests like that seemed like you know
kind of like mind-boggling like they
actually care about what I can't find
like they tell me what to do I never
decide what to do
um and so um like students recognize
this I think and and generally love it
like they resonate very well and people
know intuitively that like something is
wrong
um that like we're not really allowed to
follow our interests and like that
muscle is therefore withering on the
bone like that's something that like was
really good when you were like a toddler
like you could follow your curiosity
with no objective like every day of your
life and somehow this is being destroyed
over the course of childhood by the
education system so if people do
recognize that and seem to feel really
good and liberated by the message that
actually there's a principled argument
for why you should continue to do that
and the system is working against it but
what I don't have and I haven't heard is
from people in the system itself like I
just they haven't I mean I'm not saying
that they're obligated to do this but
I've never been invited to an education
conference I've never gone to a teacher
conference I've I've heard basically
nothing from people in educational
Administration teachers uh like it just
um silence and you know I tried a little
I like Cinema but that's really weird by
the way like I usually don't try to
force myself onto a community like if
they come to me like that's natural and
organic and I'm really happy but but
like to actually like just cold email
someone and just be like you might find
this book interesting it's totally
embarrassing and it's it's weird
um it's like if people don't want to
read the book they don't want to read
the book
um but I tried it a little because I was
like I really really wish they knew
maybe people just don't know about this
book and I felt like this is a weapon
for the Educators because I figured they
probably are sick of the whole thing I
don't think that the teachers like doing
the standardized testing stuff and
having their total autonomy ripped away
from them like it just seemed I'm sure
it's stifling and they don't like it but
I just haven't had the the conversation
the people I really want to talk to are
the administrators who try to run this
ridiculous system
um the teachers I imagine would feel
good about this
um but it's the people who construct the
system
um and it's it's of course other people
critique it from other directions
um you know people obviously don't like
standardized testing there's people who
don't like that but what I think I'm
offering is a better way to attack that
because it's not just coming from the
fact we don't like standardized testing
it's a principled argument going all the
way back to optimization and like why it
doesn't work when you have really
ambitious objectives and that's I think
a really difficult thing for like people
who are answering to the system to
explain
um because they don't know these
principles they don't understand that
like this is actually extremely naive
from the perspective of how search works
to think that you're going to fix an
entire complex system in this very naive
like basically destined to land on a
local Optimum and sort of naive hill
climbing almost that we're doing to the
entire system
um and so that's the thing I'm missing
we haven't I haven't had that
conversation
um I wish I could have the conversation
because I think it would give them a
weapon I imagine a lot of people would
like this weapon including all these
critics like they don't like the system
but they don't know about this argument
and I wish they did because like if they
knew about the argument I think it would
make it much more principled and uh and
much more Sharp
I think uh so so you basically mentioned
that there's two angles which you can
sort of make the criticism against the
education system there's the
institutional level at which we uh abuse
objectives essentially and also at the
individual level
um I think in the conversations I've had
in like the super memo Wiki Community
with a lot of people in there a lot of
people feel really disillusioned with
um you know attempts to change uh the
education system at the institutional
level because at each level you
basically have like this pyramid of uh
administrators on top of you each one of
whom can just say no you you can't do
that you can't change the system any
sort of variation to them
um is kind of uh going either going
downhill or it's not worthwhile because
it doesn't look good uh by the metrics
and the measures that they use
um on the other hand I think there's a
lot of sort of wiggle room and potential
uh to apply these uh kind of principles
in your book to uh individuals because
anyone one like students or just free
Learners or anyone who just wants to
learn something can apply these things
to their own life so
um yeah I'm curious to know like advice
for people in the education system
who've read your book they feel inspired
what can they do uh to sort of apply the
principles to their life working within
the constraints of the education system
uh okay yeah so in the education people
in the education system so do you mean
students or teachers you see that uh
students students yeah yeah
um so it is
it is a shame
that yeah that the administrative system
is so tangled up that like that it does
seem impossible like I just can't accept
this there's got to be a way to do
obviously there needs to be a revolution
sort of because of the fact that it's so
entrenched that it's just like
impossible like for anybody at any level
to do anything
um but still I don't think we should
give up on that but to turn to the
individuals actually one interesting
story like I did have this one one
experience kit that was interesting
where um I I I was I gave an interview
on like a public radio local public
radio in New Mexico
um and and somebody some grandmother
heard me uh talking about this um just
the general non-objective stuff on the
radio and and somehow found my office
number like got in touch with me and
Cole called me and basically told me
that um her grandson who was 14 years
old
um was was too objective in his life and
he's like it's like partly that he's
getting it from the education system
like he's really worried about all these
objectives and she said you know can you
can you talk to him
um and like help him not be this way
anymore and I mean this is really really
weird for me I mean I'm you know a
computer scientist I don't usually do
like sessions one-on-one
um but I agreed to this
um because I thought it was super
interesting
um so she came with her with her
grandson um to meet me
um and and we had you know I explained
everything in the book and and kind of
uh tried to show him that he doesn't
need to think that way
um and I think it's it's sort of
Representative yeah of what students are
facing like we talk about like how how
we feel within the education system is
we do get really really objectively
obsessed um because the system is
training us to be that way and this just
the incentives make it Force us to be
that it's like not anyone's fault
because like you're gonna fail in school
it's going to have bad effects on your
whole life so it's not like you're crazy
to care about this
um but so like this is one of the the
problems like in giving this kind of
advice is that like you can't really
just buck the system entirely or else
you're taking huge risks now I do think
um some people get away with it you know
somebody like Steve Jobs who by the way
I don't think he's screwed up in high
school I don't actually know but I know
in college he dropped out
um like you get to that point like that
even that is kind of risky I don't
necessarily advise it but like some
people are just you have a very strong
view of what's interesting like Steve
Jobs is interesting because he did did I
guess he thought calligraphy was
interesting he sat in on calligraphy
classes as I understand it after
dropping out because it didn't matter
anymore what classes he was attending
um and like that's like really being
confident in What In Your Instinct for
the interesting like because yeah it's
true like most for most people I think
what possible use is it to be looking
learning about calligraphy when you
basically just flush your education down
the toilet
um but that's that's what I call like
real dedication to the non-objective
principle I mean the guy just had an
instinct
um and I think that to some extent like
I wouldn't necessarily advise to um to
go that far
um but actually one thing you should
keep in mind is that like the the
trade-off that you're dealing with here
is the trade-off between objectives and
risk like the less objective you are the
more risk you have in some sense
um because you don't have a security
blanket and you don't know where you're
going and so of course you're accepting
risk if you don't have clear objectives
the problem is if you do have clear
objectives if they're really ambitious
they're not going to help you anyway but
if they're not ambitious they might help
you it's just that you'll achieve
something that's not ambitious
um and the education system is
constructed that way so there's a lot of
things that the education system will
deliver to you as long as you're
diligent that are reasonable and modest
um and like you can get to certain
points like you can become an accountant
it's not because I'm trying to criticize
accountants it's just that I'm saying
that like many people have achieved that
it's not anything that's like
extraordinary it's not like hearing
cancer it's like we know there's a path
to get to accounting and to become an
accountant and we know what the steps
are and so if you're diligent and follow
that objectively like you'll probably
succeed
um and so like the the trade-off here is
that if you don't want to just do these
modest kinds of things and by Modest I
don't mean bad I just mean things that
we know are just achievable by like
reasonably diligent people
um and you just want to do something
extraordinary
um then you're going to be taking risks
this is obvious but it's something that
you have to understand it's like when
you get non-objective you're talking
about assuming risk on purpose now like
a smart person I think will will mix
well they won't have all their eggs in
one basket so they'll be doing some
things to protect themselves which are
just basically objectively driven
especially in school like passing their
classes but they'll also have some
things that are not objectively driven
um which are basically just following
passions and interests and doubling down
on things that nobody knows where it's
going to lead
um and that I think is like a reasonable
piece of advice like you should be able
to do that I think school does kind of
um inhibit that that even that like that
which is not crazy
um like that that I mean that attitude
is not crazy but it is crazy to inhibit
it because this is healthy
um and I think school even inhibits that
because like you know you get to high
school and you're just like saturated
with all these clubs and activities it's
like all laid out for you objectively
all the things you can achieve that you
can't just like follow an interest you
know it's dangerous like for applying
for college and all these look at every
minute of your time should be accounted
in a way that you know the assessment
culture will eventually approve and say
oh good job that's amazing you know
um you got like this rating and you're a
great debater you're doing the debate
team and you like ran well in track and
you volunteered at the nursing home and
all this stuff like these are things
that are laid out before you objectively
that you can do so like to actually make
time to follow an interest it doesn't
mean like you spend five minutes a day
on a hobby like I think like the
non-objective thing for an individual
you have to really be serious like
you're gonna follow something because
it's interesting to The Bitter End
um and that's like the way you get to
interesting things and The Bitter End
could be better like like it might not
work because you don't know where it's
going but the thing is it's people who
are following paths that they don't know
where they're going that eventually
sometimes get to amazing things so
that's how amazing things happen
um and the problem is that the I think
the education system could allow some
degree of this like I I accept and
actually even agree that the education
system needs some degree of object of
objectivity
um because like there are some Basics
that absolutely do need to be locked in
like along the road to maturity but I
think that we could also give people
some more latitude to follow what they
think is interesting and we see I think
that people
um
oftentimes like don't necessarily have a
well-rounded record across like all the
disciplines like the straight A student
type of person like all the AP tests
like in America the aps like the ap's
the advanced placement testing like Dave
we don't you see people who aren't like
that who have a lot of like doing pretty
mediocre in some areas but like somehow
they just got obsessed with this one
area like went down that path way way
far down more than like the normal
person would and it turned out to make
like an incredible career and now
they're they're famous and rich or
whatever it is that you care about and
like they've had a huge impact on the
world and this story happens over and
over and over again you know if you look
at people who are like wildly successful
it's like they let they left left they
let some things kind of Wither on the
vine
um and just went down like doubled down
on the thing they found really
interesting and the problem is that we
don't create a situation where people
can do that with the degree of
protection so that if it doesn't work
out like they're not ruined
um because the education system is sort
of about ruining you if you don't follow
the objective principle like whole cloth
through every impossible discipline
um and so there's there's a there's a
reasonable compromise I think an
individual can find
um but I think like the message that I
would want to send overall is that you
have a right and it's actually
principled
um if you do decide that you're going to
follow some of your interests pretty
hardcore
um in your life but protect yourself
like do some of the things you need to
do but this is a reasonable thing to do
it's not like crazy it's principle
because I'm saying like we've written a
whole book we've done research we have
results that show following your
interest it's a principal thing to do if
you want to accomplish something
extraordinary it won't work out maybe
even most of the time but if you keep
doing it and you don't put all your eggs
in one basket only people who do that
will be the ones who do something
extraordinary
hey Kenneth um first of all a big fan of
your work and I have a somewhat related
question on curiosity were
I'm curious you touched on sort of the
topic on multiple or multiple sites but
I'm curious like thinking very
sort of first principles what is it is
it potentially a an instinct or is it
even
does this Instinct have a objective as
it's on its own and yeah I'm curious if
you have thought about about this and
what role curiosity plays in this
non-objective driven search process
yeah yeah
um well curiosity I think is very close
to what I'm calling interestingness
um it's an instinct for what's
interesting
um I guess you might say it's also
accompanied with curiosity with a drive
to pursue it I suppose because if you're
not curious you might think something's
interesting but not be willing to
actually pursue it so sort of your your
your driven and actually have a very
kind of keen Instinct for the for what's
interesting
um and so I think like it's essential
like it cannot like if you're trying to
actually follow this kind of like
open-ended principle of search like
you're saying like I'm gonna actually
follow paths that may lead to things
that I don't know yet um but that could
be extraordinary you like basically have
to be curious because you need the drive
to actually get the motivation to do it
and you need to have a sense of what's
interesting see the problem the word
interesting is ill-defined and this is
why often people will just want to turn
away from this kind of advice because
everybody wants a really really really
like detailed definition so we can get
objective again then we'll feel
comfortable let's get a definition then
we can have a metric then I can then you
can tell me whether what you're doing is
really interesting but back to feeling
comfortable but going nowhere
um because the thing about it is it is
subjective but the thing about it is
that like human beings one of the
greatest talents we have is that we have
this subjective Instinct for the
interestingness this is what's
absolutely amazing about us I think when
it comes to human intelligence this is
what AI still doesn't have it doesn't
understand subjective interesting it
starts to AI over time is like basically
like taking away all these advantages
that we have but that's one of the last
ones to go I think is this this knows
for the interesting because it's
basically an understanding about the
future and not the past like we can
learn how to do things that have already
been done and AI can learn those things
too by just watching and observing the
data of how they've been done but
interestingness is about what hasn't
been done yet and what isn't known yet
and there's not data on it yet is the
problem but we have a very keen Talent
about this
um and so like to in order to create the
future like to uncover the paths that
are going to lead to things that are
extraordinary in the future we have to
follow Paths of interestingness and
therefore we have to be curious
yeah I think there's actually a few sort
of
this like models of curiosity and
attempts to somehow model it one I like
is that it reduces
sort of the discrepancies in our heads
of existing theories where we try to
explore think David Deutsch also has to
some extent that idea we try to explore
paths where it reduces
this discrepancy or the problems
basically in our head between theories
I'm curious if you would try to model it
somehow mathematically or like
programming curiosity do you have any
like mental model of how this process
works
uh that's true and you're right people
have tried to model it and continue to
try to model it and um it's it's a topic
in artificial intelligence uh people
even would use the term curiosity
sometimes but you hear other terms like
intrinsic motivation and but but
basically they're about that kind of a
thing
um and so yeah especially in the field
of AI it's it's in everybody's interest
to figure out how to model curiosity
because we understand that exploration
is important so what are the kind of
elements that go into that well one one
that's clear I think is novelty
um it's one thing that's true I think
you could say sort of blanket as true
all the time is that
um everything that's interesting is
novel
um however it is the converse is not
true so it's not true that everything
that's novel is interesting
they're novel things that aren't
interesting just crazy like useless like
wouldn't interest anybody but the thing
is like that everything that interesting
that is interesting is novel is pretty
much true you know there are lots of
Amazing Ideas like cars for example but
they're not interesting right now
because they're not novel and sometimes
they were novel they were then they were
interesting and so it's always going to
be accompanied with novelty and so I
think the first thing the first proxy is
novelty and the ability to detect it
it's not sufficient like I said because
um novelty alone doesn't tell you
something's interesting but it's it's
necessary
um and so
um like that there's a lot of work in
like like I said like one of the first
things that came out of our insights
about the objective Paradox was this
novelty search algorithm so it's named
after novelty and it was basically
saying like we're just going to look for
novelty as a proxy for interestingness
we recognized that like it's not as good
as interestingness if I could formalize
interestingness this would be an
incredibly powerful algorithm
um but this again especially what we're
talking about it's very hard to
formalize but novelty is at least a
proxy and can do some interesting things
um and so like but the thing is even in
novelty you have to understand that it's
also not completely defined just by
saying novelty it's not a fully defined
concept uh because you know what is what
makes something novel that we have to
get into that
um and it's actually domain specific and
um and we can argue about it you know
like I mean we we used to be interested
like in AI like we're interested in like
one of our sort of toy domains for
novelty was robots walking through mazes
because one of the points we wanted to
make was that if you just try to find a
novel path through the maze then um
you'll eventually figure out how to get
out of the maze
um you don't even have to know what the
objective is you'll eventually get out
so this is sort of like an allegorical
point in the kitchen makes it makes a
point in a microcosm but the thing is
then you have to then say well what does
it mean to have a novel path like is it
every point along the trajectory we
should look at and then we should
compare paths Point by point or is it
like just the final Point like then we
could say like which is where you ended
up and then it's like novel compared to
ending up in some other place and like
the answers that there is no right
answer to this it just depends what
you're interested in and just get back
to what's interesting again so it's it's
it's it shows that basically it's a very
complex problem because even in
discussing novelty now we have to get
back to sort of saying well what are we
interested in like one thing is clear I
think like if you talk about robots and
mazes like I made this point that like
it if you had a light that was like
attached to the head of the robot or the
top of the robot say it's like a wheeled
robot or something and it can blink
basically the robot can decide when to
Blink the light
um if we define novelty as the blinking
pattern of the light clearly this will
not help us learn about interesting
places to go because it's completely
orthogonal it has nothing to do with
what we're interested in so what we're
interested in actually affects what we
think are actually like the dimensions
of interest within the novelty space
itself and we're going in circles now
because now we're saying Novelties
defined in terms of interestingness
um but really what it gets to I think is
that we can begin to assemble the
components of interestingness but it's
domain specific and we have to we have
have to Grapple ultimately with the the
idea that like a little bit of this is
subjective ultimately because it's
because it is domain specific so like I
have to sort of like uh enter into the
conversation that I care where the robot
goes like that is just my own interest
and it's not worth having a giant
philosophical discussion about why like
you could try to push me on this and say
but why do you care where the robot goes
we need to be objective about this it
can't be that you're just interested in
where it goes there's got to be a reason
like is it that like it's going to go
somewhere important because we care
where it goes like this is getting like
kind of pedantic and ridiculous if we
start discussing it at that level
because ultimately everything we do is
motivated subjectively like why are we
even pursuing AI at all it's just
because we find it interesting we could
argue it's going to be useful but but
useful for things that we're interested
in doing and so forth and so like I
think at some level we have to accept
that this will ground out in something
subjective and we're just going to be
writing down if we're talking about
formalization what do we subjectively
find interesting at the end of the day
which is not Universal like we all have
different opinions about what's
interesting and that's healthy and good
because that's going to help us diverge
and explore the space of what's possible
and so like an individual will if
they're trying to formalize it formalize
it differently from another individual
if we be honest about this and that's
totally fine we're gonna have to Grapple
with that if we really want to formalize
it but ultimately the end of the day
subjectivity will come into it
hello I have another question which is
which is for the interesting
and
you basically propose replacing
objective-based searching with humans
natural senses for the detecting
interestingness but in potential
and for example you say that all of us
have a kind of instinct for stupid
potential
but referring to these abilities as
instincts maybe taking to mean they are
inborn and also fixed but are they
inborn and fixed so can we through
learning become better at sensitive
potential and better at judging what is
interesting and in the opposite
direction it can become worse at it and
now to take it back to education
in their students often don't search for
information themselves but they are
supplied information they must study by
others and so they don't really rely on
these instincts to find the Stepping
Stones themselves and do you think that
this could possibly lead to losing some
of those abilities because of misuse
well great questions
um like on the first point about um can
you get better at searching for
interestingness
um I think absolutely
um like it's your your what you think is
interesting is a function of your
lifetime of experience
um and so like one thing to understand
here though is again it doesn't ground
out anything objective because like
there's no ground truth about what's
interesting like there's nothing to
ultimately decide or there's no Arbiter
that says like you're wrong or you're
right about it but what does happen what
I think happens is that as you gain
expertise in something especially if you
did go far down a path
um like like if you were researching AI
like I was you'll start having an
instinct for some of the real nuances
you know some of the fine-grained points
that like other people won't see at all
and this will influence what you find to
be interesting
um and this is why like when we invest
in educating people for many years like
phds it could be almost 30 years or
something like we should let them tell
us what they think is interesting like
the fact that we like basically cage all
these people by having to have them
objectively justify all their decisions
is basically destroying what we've
created like investing all these years
and helping people to hone their sense
for what's interesting but it's just
that it's field specific you know and so
I think I kind of think that everybody
everybody in every field including
people who aren't in a field have some
really well kind of honed Instinct for
what's interesting in something because
it's what you've spent your life on you
know I mean even if you're a homeless
like you've got experience with that you
know what's interesting with respect to
that kind of life
um and like you're gonna you're gonna
get like you know very kind of
fine-grained
um and and very sensitive like
interestingness detectors out of that
and we should trust you in your own
field like that you know kind of what's
interesting not that you know it's not
that so I'm not saying that we should
just trust you just because you've had
many years in the field we should still
discuss it like you should be able to
justify your interest to me if I'm one
of your colleagues or peers
um but we don't have to necessarily
ground it out in something objective we
just need to understand like why do you
think this is interesting you should be
able to articulate it after you know if
you're like an expert in some area
um but you but in that sense I think all
of us have become much better at knowing
what's interesting
um with respect to where we've sort of
invested Our Lives
um and so like can it get worse
um through the education system so
actually yeah I think that this is
um this is a uh like a subtle Point
actually that I think like how you learn
something affects
um how it's represented ultimately in
your mind and therefore sort of your
your your flexibility in using that
knowledge
um and one problem I think I've seen
um this is also in sort of AI
experiments as well is that like if you
learn something objectively including if
you're an AI like if you're sort of
optimizing along a gradient that's like
very strict
um then um the representation that comes
out of that tends to be quite brittle
um and this means that like although you
do know the answer in a very specific
situations you are not very good at
moving out of those situations to the
adjacent possible like that's next to
those situations because your
representation is very rigidly rigidly
um defined based on your objective
experience this I've seen in AIS I don't
get into all the details but like what's
really fascinating like if you do like
objective-based search and you solve a
problem and then you do novelty search
which is like not objectively based and
it solves the same problem like the the
novelty-based version tends to be much
more flexible like if you for example
perturb the weights of the neural
network or something like that like it's
way it's way less brittle
um because it's like the way you lock in
knowledge if you're pursuing
interestingness or novelty is totally
different like there's a different
pattern of stepping stones that you
follow and they tend to be much more
broad-based you know because if you're
following novelty then you're interested
in sort of like broad-based Revelations
like whoa symmetry that's kind of cool
like I don't know what it leads to but I
like symmetry it's appealing in some
aesthetic sense maybe we go far further
down here but the thing is that on the
objective track where you went through
stepping stones that are just always
about like raising the score raising the
score raising the score symmetry never
came into it so you don't have this
concept as like part of like your
repertoire of Concepts and it doesn't
like it can't you don't have these
General kind of concepts for this
aesthetic senses that build up over time
and so I think like the education system
being as it is very objectively focused
it's all about kind of like hill
climbing on scores on tests and things
like that is creating representations in
people's heads that are like really
brittle
um and only focuses particular one kind
of a thing that you can do yes you can
solve the problem if you've got a good
score in the test but you can't move
adjacently very well and I think that
translates also into meaning you don't
know what's interesting
um because like that's like looking at
the adjacent and being able to
understand how the adjacent relates to
uh where you are right now and what
might be an interesting path to take and
you're not equipped because you've
followed an objective path which is why
like it's way better if you're going to
get to be an expert on something to have
followed your your own Stepping Stones
like if it was driven because it was a
personal passion or interest especially
if you're obsessed with it like you're
going to have like way more mental
flexibility within that domain that you
arrive upon if you arrived it in this
non-objective fashion then if you
arrived on it to this strict rigid kind
of like hill climbing optimization sense
which which is imposed upon us and you
will be like the kind of person who
becomes famous for that and creative in
that as opposed to the person who just
got there because they're really really
good at following like the the kind of
rigid objective curriculum that we have
in our schools and this is obviously a
problem for all of us um is that we're
creating people who aren't going to be
like really great at detecting the
interesting in their fields is why a lot
of the time like the people who seem
like really kind of um like like
virtuoso in their field are like weirdly
people who like weren't actually doing
well in school or something like that or
like rebelling against it and like the
teachers are pissed at them because like
they followed their own stepping stones
and became obsessed in their own right
and developed completely different kinds
of representations which have S
aesthetic stepping stones that are
related to like recognizing large big
picture aspects of how the world Works
um and so I think that um that that this
is this is why another reason why
following the interestingness is very
important for everybody even if you find
it it didn't lead to a success because
you've developed representations that
are really really different
um I remember that um there was this guy
um
there was this guy in in my on the
cross-country team in high school you
could barely run it was amazing like
either he must have just like his
parents told him to join the team or or
maybe like he just like was determined
to do it
um but it was just I couldn't understand
how someone couldn't run at all like
I've never seen that before
um but it reminded me of um you know
like the way I think about like little
kids they don't try to learn how to walk
as an objective you know you don't sit
there like saying well everything I do
is about like learning how to walk
they're just discovering things open and
it's like wow I can kick my leg around
that's cool like I don't know where this
leads to sit there like oh this is going
to help me get to walk it's just like
wow I just discovered something
um like I could stand up that's like
interesting that is interesting like I
really think the kids early learning is
like open-ended and this to me is why
these behaviors are so insanely flexible
like like the way that walking as a
human being is totally different than
walking as a robot but we've also seen
that like um that like if you do
objectively optimize walking like
straight directly in a robot it tends to
have a much more brittle gait again than
something that discovered how to walk
through novelty search
um and so I kind of imagined that this
kid was like like really trying to learn
how to run in an objective sense like
that's like the totally wrong way to do
it it's not going to lead to actually
getting good at doing something at all
and you get very brittle outcomes from
that which is just totally fascinating
you know when you think about it because
it's like that is the procedure for like
everything that we do in terms of
training ourselves and so like the tax
that it's taking on our ability to be
really actually truly good at something
it's just like mind-blowing I just don't
know what it means
um and and it's not even discussed
all right so I know people uh in the
audience are just absolutely dying to
ask questions I'm seeing a ton of stuff
flashing up in the chat so if anyone has
a question uh feel free to click the
reactions face at the bottom and click
the raise hand thing and then I can
unmute you and uh go ahead
uh so Henrik did you have question are
you ready to go
awesome okay
um yeah I just wanted to sort of have
you expand a little bit more on on what
you were just talking about
somewhere you said that's a novelty
search accumulates complexity and and I
wanted to see if you could sort of
expand on that idea why did I sort of
novelty search lead to complexity
yeah like I said this is a subtle issue
and like the reason that I uh started to
um understand it or think about it
really goes back to machine learning
research
um so but but I but you know then I kind
of like once again bounce back to my my
general objective critique like what
they could sort of like a social
critique but like it really originates
with machine learning research and
observations that I had there and so
I'll try to navigate the subtlety a
little a little bit without getting
overly technical about it but like
basically one thing that I was observing
um early on was that like if you
discover something and this is now we're
talking about in machine learning
algorithm if you discover something
objectively uh with algorithms so I have
I had algorithms actually I should say
that that like could increase in
complexity over time I was really
interested in these kinds of algorithms
like one was called the the neat
algorithm which did for neuro evolution
of augmenting topologies which would
actually like evolve a neural network
that gets bigger as it gets better and
because it's getting bigger that means
there's more Connections in the neural
network more waste it can be optimized
and so in principle it can get more
complex in the behaviors it can exhibit
and I was always like really fascinated
by increasing complexity like what that
can do and so I was algorithms that do
that and so but if you take an algorithm
like that and you put it within the
confines as an objective search so you
take neat this neat algorithm and you
say like you know um learn how to do
this task
um and then you you take the
non-objective alternative which is like
a novelty search and you don't say learn
how to do these tests because that would
be an objective but instead you say do
something novel over and over and over
again but as a side effect of doing
again it does actually solve the task
which sometimes happens I'm not saying
by the way that you can always solve
everything by novelty search because one
of the key principles of now research is
we don't know what it's going to do it
can it'll do something interesting but
we don't know what interesting thing but
sometimes it'll solve a problem you
actually want to have solved and then
you have this alternative which is this
objectively driven thing that also
solved the problem and what I observed
which is just Stark is that basically as
a rule um The objectively Driven
solution was always three times larger
than the novelty driven solution like in
terms of like the size of the neural
network it would have grown to three
times the size if it was solved as an
objective than if it wasn't
um and so this is just like this is just
a an empirical fact let me just observe
this it's a phenomenon Now isn't that
interesting like why is it always so
much bigger when it's done like
objectively then when it's not done it's
done non-objectively well one immediate
conclusion that you could draw from this
is probably a better representation in
the novelty driven version now actually
we can go look at the representation but
before even doing that it's pretty it's
pretty likely that it is better because
generally more compact is better right
like if you can encapsulate a behavior
more compactly it probably means that
you haven't memorized it like it's not a
specifically memorized type of thing
rather you've probably discovered
something fundamental like about how it
actually works under the hood and like
one way one of the experiments like
after this realization that we did like
to kind of make it really easy to to dig
in and actually see the internal
representations was we tried to have it
learn to reproduce images because then
you can actually look at the internal
representation of these images and
they're also images so you can like see
how it's building those images up
internally and so what we would say is
like we would use neet to reproduce an
image like get a neural network to
Output an image and then we'd use
novelty search not novel search sorry we
would actually do get we had an
alternative system it's not in all
research but it is non-objective where
people would actually like search
through image space on their own without
an objective and they would just kind of
like stumble upon interesting pictures
and so what we're saying was like let's
try to reproduce the pictures that the
people found which is called pick
breeder which were really amazing
pictures of things like butterflies and
skulls they actually look like things
with an objective driven algorithm which
would then try to reproduce the picture
and once again as usual like if it could
do it which it usually couldn't because
like it's usually a lot of the time you
can't reproduce things objectively that
can get non-objectively but if you can
usually with simpler images maybe you
can again three times bigger but then
the interesting thing is now we can look
under the hood at how the pictures are
assembled inside the neural networks
that were discovered and what you find
is that is pure spaghetti in the
objective case even if it solved the
problem this is like a serious problem
that I think is like totally missed in
the entire field of machine learning
right now is that like simply saying
that something works doesn't really mean
it's a good thing because like under the
hood it could be an absolute immense
um and so like under the hood like this
thing's outputting a perfectly nice like
uh say mouth like we gotta it made this
thing we call the cloud mouth like a
smiling
um it could reproduce it but under the
hood it's an absolute spaghetti mess
like which means sort of like this
neuron's responsible for like this
little dot over here and this one's
responsible that dot over there it's
like it's completely a disorganized mess
it has nothing to do with like the
principles of like how you form a
symmetric mouth then you go over and
look at the non-objectively discovered
version with just a tiny Network
um and you find things like this weight
in the network will make the mouth like
expand and contract in a completely
symmetric way as you would expect it
would one other neuron to make it open
and close like an actual mouth would
like amazing like this is absolutely
crazy get that because like no one
designed these representations they're
implicit representations they developed
through a non-objective search where
every step along the way somebody just
found something that because it was
interesting
um and so it just absolutely Stark but
then so we have evidence of this but we
might say why why is it spaghetti in the
objective case why is it so elegant in
the non-objective case well actually now
here's where I have to start to
speculate because it's less formal to
talk about it's not just an empirical
observation but my belief is that what's
going on is that if you're objectively
driven then what you tend to do is you
lock in spaghetti because any random
thing that you do that happens to
increase your score locked in like I
don't care if it's like interesting not
interesting like if I make this pixel
light up over here and it causes the
score to go up because basically it's
one of the like 8 000 pixels I need to
light up then I'll increase the score
I'll lock that in that gets locked in so
it's like completely random like what's
happening where in the network it has no
the organization whatsoever the
non-objective search has a completely
different story narrative like how it
discovered the picture because back
before like before you get to the
butterfly somebody saw something
symmetric
um and they just liked it because it was
symmetric not because they know it's
going to lead to a butterfly they don't
know where it's going to lead they're
not trying to get anything in particular
it's just that symmetry is interesting
to us and by the way it really is it's
like people love symmetric things so it
gets to this question like what is
interesting well it's actually like
there's huge complex reasons for
different things being interesting at
different levels of intelligence things
like symmetry they could be innate I
mean maybe even like going back to
Evolution like it's why there's like an
instinct for symmetry but whatever it is
people like it they find it interesting
they see that it's a branch point to
many things like maybe instinctually you
understand that so many things in the in
the world both natural and artificial
are symmetric just like looking at a car
from the front or looking at a face from
the front um looking at a butterfly from
the front like and so forth like all
these symmetric things so when I see
symmetry it's just like this is cool
um and so now symmetry as a step along
the road to who knows where nobody knew
it's just interesting has been locked
into the representation I know the
variations on that are variations on a
symmetric theme and this happens in a
hierarchical way then you get something
that looks like maybe head like and then
that thing gets locked in and so forth
and so on but it happens incrementally
in a way we don't know where we're going
but each step of the law along the way
is interesting and they're represented
on top of each other so like the things
in the future are dependent upon the
symmetric representation underneath and
it becomes a beautiful hierarchy and
then you stumble on something that you
actually want or care about and it's
represented absolutely beautiful
beautifully because it was discovered
non-objectively and so we see this
phenomenon for real like we have lots of
evidence wrote papers about this because
it's so fascinating like the
non-objective representations are
incredible they're absolutely amazing
like we had we looked in the
representation of a skull and it was
like literally like a single connection
to the network where you can like open
and close the mouth it's like a cartoon
character like you can actually like
take an apple and there's a stem on top
and actually it's a shadow it's like 3D
and you can actually move the stem back
and forth with a single weight in the
neural network it's like a detached the
stem it's a modular part of the
representation it makes it wiggle back
and forth with the shadow completely
plausibly like as if someone had
designed this thing but it's just an
accidental Discovery this would never
happen in an objective driven
representation it's like no chance
um and so
um this is uh
like by the way this does not apply to
like modern like image Generation stuff
which is now like like the rage like
that stuff is totally different what I'm
talking about because those are image
generators that generate lots of things
from a single Network
um so they may get forced to actually
understand some of the underlying stuff
like I don't want you to get confused I
think I'm talking about that stuff I'm
talking about I train a network that
output only one image just one image and
this is what happens so this one image
it just like like amazing like it's like
it's almost like a human design the
underlying representation to match with
our intuitive understanding of what are
the individual components and how they
relate to each other and so um to me
this is like a deep deep lesson it's a
lesson not just about artificial
intelligence and search but again about
life like because imagine what is
happening in our brains when we are
objectively driven through our entire
life it's just causing absolute
spaghetti which is probably why you
forgot 80 of everything that you ever
got a good score on a test on the minute
you left College you know because like
you just like your representation is
horrible it can't be extended to
anything else it's like total spaghetti
um it's but the people who like got
there on their own through their own
passion it's a totally different path
and this is why it would be good if we
could get people to follow these paths
on their own and just take their own
trajectories it's a completely different
educational system but like if you're
pursuing math because like it's just
really interesting to you you'll come up
with a totally different representation
and that's why most mathematicians
actually did do that
um yeah I just had a question about
something that seemed assumed in these
discussions of curiosity as a driver of
behavior or like raising free-range kids
let's say is something like the
optimality of this curiosity signal as a
way to live your life and drive your
behavior I'm just curious what you think
about that and whether you think
there's a risk for even a smart person
to go down these blind alleys for a
Lifetime by following interests alone
and not actually making any significant
progress and I you know I can imagine a
situation where like a programmer is
making a tool for themselves or
something interesting where something
like a Market Force or a metric of will
people pay me for this would actually be
a positive signal and and allow you to
make something that you would even find
more interesting and useful by by virtue
of that presence or that signal from
someone else kind of like a metric so
I'm just curious what you think of that
optimality and if you do think it's
optimal what's the basis of that
argument and again not that I'm on the
other side of it I'm just curious of
your thoughts yeah yeah good question
um so um like I said a little bit
earlier in in the conversation
um definitely risk is part of the
equation
um if you're going to follow curiosity
interestingness and so forth uh you are
you are assuming risk and there's no
doubt about that
um the problem that we're facing here is
that there's a trade-off in life
um which is that you can minimize risk
but if you do that then you won't do
anything extraordinary or you can pursue
Paths of interestingness which means you
might do something extraordinary but
you're causing risk to go up
um and so like there's no way out of the
trade-off like if you want to do
something extraordinary you have to take
risks there's absolutely no way out of
this if you want to change the world
like you're going to have taken a risk
and and you you you know you might
there's a good chance of failure and
this is an important caveat to the
entire discussion like is that like if
you follow Paths of interestingness you
could you totally could end up like
having something bad happen to you
um and so like a rational kind of
realistic a realistic way to think about
this is that like we need to acknowledge
the risk of behaving in this manner and
and then take that into account in our
individual behavior
um and so like like probably like a
middle ground is like the most
reasonable take for most people but like
even before that I would say it's up to
you how much risk you're willing to take
in your life you know it's just totally
reasonable to to to to tolerate whatever
love level you think is good as long as
you're being honest with yourself so if
you don't want to take any risk at all
there's absolutely nothing wrong with it
and I would not call that sub-optimal
it's your choice you know you can go get
a get a degree in accounting and
accounting I don't mean to pick on
accounting but it's like we know that's
something you can do you know get it get
a degree in in finance or something
you'll be you'll learn about how to do
that
um and and so you you can have a low
risk lifestyle
um and and this is I think um totally
reasonable nothing wrong with it at all
it's not sub-optimal it's just an
opinion
um but like the the thing that if you
don't if you do follow Paths of
interestingness you will be exposed to
much higher risk and so like the middle
ground I'm talking about is to um be a
little bit careful or to kind of
um to cover Your Tracks a little bit so
that it doesn't mean disaster in your
life right I mean for most people like
there's some Rebels out there they don't
they don't they don't give a they don't
give a crap about it like they'll just
do the thing they think is cool and
they'll have a you know a giant car
crash and that's the end
um like most people want a little bit of
I want a bit of a bit of risk mitigation
and so that means do some things that
are objective and like enhance your
safety and make sure like for example if
you want to take a lot of risk of
research maybe you should get a job
first you know like where you can do
research like you can start taking those
risks when you're like you know 18 years
old and like basically just hope that
like you do something revolutionary but
nobody wants to hire you yeah it doesn't
work out you're screwed
um but you know if you took several
years to actually follow a more kind of
conventional path that maybe you're a
little bit more safe
um at that point can I ask where you
fall on that on that Spectrum I know
it's personal questions you don't have
to answer I'm just curious
uh yeah so where I fall on the Spectrum
um
so yeah there are um some areas in my
life where I'm like very risk-averse
um and then there's others where I'm
like not risk-averse at all
um but I think like well so for example
like like a medical risk like I just
basically won't risk something physical
like I'm just afraid of like something
happening for to me or my kids or
anything right um but like like research
risk is different you know so like there
I think I do tend to be more extreme
like I'll do something that seems crazy
um but there's one difference like which
is that I probably have several of these
at once like that's my risk mitigation
so like I'll be doing like five crazy
things at once or something so it's like
one of them probably will work out you
know it's like at least I'm not like
like if I only have one thing in all my
eggs are in one best it's pretty
frightening and I I probably wouldn't do
that
um and so like you know at first I'm not
a professor at the moment but I was and
like that was a good job for that
because like that's basically what
you're supposed to do like to have
several projects you know like some
might not work out but if some do you
need it's great and that's a form of
risk mitigation but I do think that like
my personality within the research realm
is is pretty on the rebel side
um like I'm willing to do something
crazy and like novelty search sounded
crazy at first you know like I thought
he's like oh here's an algorithm that
doesn't know what it's trying to do
um let's just do that
um and so like you know if you convince
students to do that like what does this
mean for their career and uh but it
turned out to be actually was a good
thing to do because like it's obviously
I'm sitting here in front of you because
of doing it
um and so um yeah I think I like there's
there's components of myself which is I
think worth highlighting citizens you
can do that you know you can become
compartmentalized it doesn't mean your
whole life has to be crazy
um but there can be components that are
compartmentalized where you're willing
to kind of go off on a limb
um there's another part of your question
though that I thought was like super
interesting
um which is this point about like
signals that are objective that could
influence you
um I did want to address that for a
second because is that that is important
like like you're saying like Market
forces or something like maybe you find
the market forces interesting
um obviously
um like there's a kind of conflation
that starts happening like where the
line becomes fuzzy between
interestingness and objectives at some
point like right just I'm just
interested in profit but it's not my
objective but it's actually it was
actually mean
um but I think like a a better
interpretation of it is this if you're
interested in ex say whether you call it
an interest or an objective if what you
care about is Extreme profits let's say
billions of dollars let's say you
personally want to make billions of
dollars that's kind of like an objective
you could even say you're just
interested it's not objective but either
way it's very ambitious
um well that's the kind of thing where
it won't help you if you're pursued
objectively so it doesn't matter
um like you could be as interested as
you want
um you could even claim not to be
objective but that interest does not
offer a useful signal because like you
can't do things that give you
information about that gradient like if
you let's say okay well I won't take
that volunteer internship because it
doesn't get me closer to a billion
dollars like what does that have to do
with anything it's completely irrelevant
to whether you're going to become a
billionaire it might have actually hurt
your ability because the volunteering
internship might have actually put you
on a path that's interesting that could
have led you to making a billion dollars
so that signal is not useful actually at
that point but smaller signals now this
is where it gets more interesting I
think is like if you already are at a
point like say I already have a business
that's pretty much doing well and I now
actually see that if I make this tweak
it might lead to like a huge
revolutionary change in the way that the
world Works which could lead me to
becoming a billionaire now that I think
is legitimate like because the thing is
you actually are only a stepping stone
away because you already got yourself to
the point where you're like one stepping
stone away from becoming a billionaire
but the thing is the road that led you
to being one stepping stone away had
nothing to do with that interest it was
only at the last step that that interest
kicked in but then it is legitimate
because the thing is things that are one
stepping stone away actually modest now
relatively when you're saying legitimate
what do you mean by that
uh so um
sorry can you
um say what I said was legitimate I
don't remember the exactly you're saying
when you decide to do that when you
decide to make that change which could
be revolutionary oh by the way I'll stop
after this so everybody gets a chance I
just want to follow up on this but when
you're saying it's legitimate what does
that mean legitimate in what way yeah
yeah sorry that word isn't clear
um like what I mean by legitimate is
that it's it's okay to have an objective
at that point okay okay like like what I
what I kind of believe is that things
that work as objectives tend to be
things that are one stepping stone away
from where you already are like situated
in your own life
um and so like like things like things
like you know losing weight tend to be
one stepping stone away from everyone I
mean there may be some exceptions
because like I don't know somebody's a
disability or something but in general
like you know you know what the things
to do to get to the lower weight are
like you could start exercising
um and so that's reasonable and that's
what I was calling legitimate it's a
legitimate thing okay to be objective in
that case so now you're in a special
case though when you're one stepping
stone away from becoming a billionaire
now this because most people aren't in
that situation so to them it would look
like an incredibly ambitious objective
it was actually not now because like you
got to this point and the reason you got
to that point probably isn't because you
had an objective of doing it but now
that you are at that point you see this
thing and this is actually an important
uh piece of the puzzle of great
achievement so it's not like a throwaway
statement that like when you're one and
stepping stone away from something
extraordinary I think that that is
actually what most people mistake for
being a Visionary
um like when you think of Visionaries
like you think of like these
unbelievable Geniuses usually like the
the archetype like the legend that we
hear is like this person who's like saw
way over the horizon farther than anyone
else could see they saw Stepping Stones
away like to this thing that no one else
could Envision and then they just like
drove that like so so determined Force
like it's a very objective story a
narrative but I think that like actually
this the real story is that they were
the first person to realize that we're
one stepping stone away it's a totally
different thing it's like Steve Jobs in
the iPhone it's like the pieces were in
place you know like like the iPod was
there like the technology the mobile
technology was there like it was already
there he didn't invent all that stuff it
was there and some of it he may have
invented but for other reasons that are
orthogonal to iPhones they were along a
path of interestingness but now we're
there and so the first person to see
that were one stepping stone away often
is the one who's recognized as the
Visionary and so if you want to be a
Visionary don't look 15 Stepping Stones
with the future those are false
Visionaries and I wouldn't trust people
like that it's the people who actually
see that something just snapped into
possibility and that's usually because
something changed in the world very
recently and so things like like these
like image generation technologies that
we started to see this is a situation
where a number of these kinds of
Visionaries will suddenly like appear in
the world because there's been a
technological changes implications are
not understood and so we're all thinking
what's interesting to do now and I don't
know but there's a lot of interesting
things that have obviously been opened
up somebody's going to see that
something like super amazing is just one
stepping stone away and this will cause
like something revolutionary to happen
um and that's when yeah you can be
objective and that's what I'm saying
it's legitimate because you just
realized that it just snapped into view
and now it's it's totally achievable and
pursueable
right that final Point's very insightful
but anyway a bunch of people have their
hands up so I want to give them a chance
yeah awesome questions Julio I think
you've been waiting for a long time so
go ahead
thank you
uh yeah so and
example of like very ambitious activity
are like startups uh I see them as a
very open-ended search of like the
promises like what are we solving and
the solution pays like what are we
creating
and you see often successful start story
you have this like stepping stone kind
of pattern where let's say YouTube
started out as a video dating app and
then became like a video sharing website
and Uber started out like as a limo
service or something like you see this
uh
expiration done and and they reach like
the successful caps stone at the end but
many startups are run in a hyper
objective based way where maybe before
you do anything you have a bunch of okrs
and kpis you present to investors uh so
how do you run a company with a great
ambitious Ambitions in a non-objective
base way
yeah that's a good point I do think that
these these principles have a lot of
applications when you think of startups
and venture capital and things like that
where should you invest what companies
should you invest in how do you do a
startup
um and then that's a field by the way
where where I have found that that
people in that area are very responsive
to these things like people they want to
talk about this um Venture capitalism is
some of the most receptive to these kind
of ideas they're always thinking about
how to tell whether something's going to
be interesting or good
um and so um I think that like those are
great examples like like the dating site
leading to like this this other thing
that isn't about dating
um that is opportunism
um and it's the ability to Pivot
um and it's directly related to
interestingness it's like do you think
one thing sounds interesting and then
you realize there's something else
that's more interesting you just go that
direction
um and the ability the mental
flexibility to do that I think often is
um present when we see like like these
wild successes like YouTube or something
like that it was just people are able to
follow these people are able to follow
Paths of interestingness and this is why
I think
um and I think VCS could probably say
better than me but I get the impression
that some VCS like look for that more
than like the specific idea like they're
kind of looking at the founders from a
perspective of do they have this kind of
non-objective capacity I mean they
wouldn't put it this way but they have
an instinct that like these are people
who are actually able to be
opportunistic and it's like we're hiring
the ability to find this may the path
Maze of interestingness that's just
inevitably because of the people because
those are those type of people it's
inevitably going to hit something really
cool
um and so I think that is one particular
way to look at success in kind of the
startup World
um I do think that like very objectively
driven startups can also be successful
but it's a one stepping stone away
principle like it's got to be one of
those things where somebody realized
there's something one stepping stone
away from the start
um and then that's like they they told
their investors like nobody's done this
by the way don't tell anybody like it's
very important we don't tell anybody in
a case like this but like there's a huge
opportunity in the world probably
because something has recently changed
um and then we can pursue it objectively
and there won't be a pivot
um and so I think that could be
legitimate and happen sometimes and so
you're gonna get a mix of both
um but like the the kind of
non-objective version of this I think is
is important because it is a kind of
success and I think like what what that
it's a dangerous form of success again
it assumes risk because we have no
guarantee we don't know where we're even
going with something like that
um but what I think what I would think
about it as
um the initial Vision should be a
playground
um a playground should be a new place to
play
um you want to create playgrounds like
places where there's tons of opportunity
like if you're going to be opportunistic
there has to be a new place to explore
um and so like some ideas create
playgrounds and some create Solutions
um the ones that create Solutions tend
to be the one stepping stone away but
the creation of playgrounds I think is
like equally important um in like the
ecosystem of creativity
um and so like that's not discussed
explicitly as much but like in research
this is true too that like um you know
we're constantly thinking like is this
algorithm better than that one but I
feel like this discussion misses that
like a really really cool algorithm it's
not better than something it created a
new playground so like there's all these
things suddenly we can do it's like who
cares about the metric score it doesn't
even matter the playground has been
opened up and so if your Founders have
created a playground and you can and you
can see that they're really good
opportunists like they're able to follow
the non-objective principle
um that could be a good bet actually
like they're gonna plunder that plague
around they're going to find all the
interesting things out there you can
just sit back and watch now how to be
that person that actually is navigating
the playground uh that's like that's
related to just like being sort of
non-objective in general
um but I think yeah so it gets to this
ability this ability to follow the
interesting
um and that's field specific like I said
it has to do with like a lifetime of
experience and so hopefully the
playground that you create is a
playground that you have the credibility
like to really um to really exploit
um and that's um that's I think like the
way to run things if that's a sort of
vague answer but like you're in a
playground you have to look at what's
interesting that's like within a
stepping Stone's reach and you have to
have a really good Instinct for that
um and so it some has to match up well
with your life's experience
um and you also need to get people who
similarly will share or at least accept
your instinct
um so you know I look for people on the
same wavelength if they're going to get
on a journey like that because it's
obviously like Risk is is constantly
going to be like hovering in the air
around everybody and people can't stand
that it's also part of the objective
culture but if there's not an objective
way to prove to everybody that you're
going in the right direction then if
they aren't on the same wavelength
they're going to be freaked out very
quickly and things are going to go south
um and so if you're going in a
non-objective kind of exploration in a
company which obviously eventually does
have to like turn a profit or at least
get sold to somebody then yeah things
are going to go south because people are
going to freak out pretty quickly but
the point is that you can do it I think
it's just and it's it's it scares
everybody like investors too but like
it's another area where I think as a
society and culture we could shift the
pendulum a little in the other direction
because it is a totally legitimate way
of running things it's just like it
doesn't have the objective security
blanket so it feels feels scarier but at
the end of the day it's totally
legitimate the kind of company that I
would never want to invest in is one
that basically tells me
um that there's this thing five Stepping
Stones away that's going to like
completely change the world and
rearrange Society but we actually don't
know what the stepping stones are yet
but trust us we're all really smart and
we'll get there because there's just no
no such thing as being smart enough to
know five Stepping Stones away I don't
believe in it
um too much too much empirical testing
of how the world really works has to be
done to actually find out how the world
really works and no one can Pierce
through that with intelligence it just
has to be discovered
um and so like and there are things like
that like think about self-driving cars
um like back in 2017 five years ago tons
of investment went into that because
lots of people just thought like we
didn't know how exactly it's going to
work but it has to be just around the
corner just throw Geniuses at it we'll
throw money at it it's gonna happen and
I'm not saying it's not going to happen
that's not my point at all but my point
is it's not about to happen it wasn't
about to happen it hasn't happened it's
been five years and a lot of those labs
where hundreds of millions were invested
they've been just completely thrown out
the window they're gone
um because I think the reason is because
of the objective Paradox we did not
understand that you can't just set
ambitious objectives and throw stuff at
it and expect it to work because we
don't know what the stepping stones are
and as soon as we make it objective
we're screwing up our ability to achieve
it probably the root to it is something
circuitous so there's going to be
stepping stones that lead to
self-driving cars that don't look like
self-driving cars and that's very
paradoxical and hard to understand so it
can still happen but it's going to
happen in a way that we didn't expect
that was an excellent question uh Justin
uh I'll meet you now
so most of my work is in the
homeschooling uh world in the United
States
um and there's actually an entire
educational philosophy that I think you
know pretty much coincides directly with
not objective and
um some people call it unschooling some
people call self-directed learning uh
but but there's a big following around
you know interest-based learning and uh
you know doubling down on that as the
primary form of Education as opposed to
something more following a set
curriculum
um and
I think really that is a spectrum and
most people you actually talk to you
know we do some things that are on the
curriculum and the other time most of
the time is spent on these these
non-objective learning uh
um you know uh Pursuits but uh one
critique I've heard around that is you
know from more mainstream uh Educators
uh is that
if we assume as one of our precepts
um and there's enough research that I
think it's reasonable to assume that
this is true
um that we find things interesting uh or
in order to find things interesting we
at least have to know a little bit about
it uh otherwise we just kind of filter
it out where we're not not even curious
because there's we don't have any
pre-existing knowledge to you know kind
of
um hook on to something new uh and so uh
as far as that education possibly goes
the goal of uh filling his heads with uh
you know as as many things across a wide
spectrum of disciplines
um is the is the best way to go at an
early stage in order to uh
allow them later on to find things that
are interesting in any different number
of things
um so I'd kind of be curious about you
know if you are familiar with
um self-directed education anything like
that
um what uh
where along that Spectrum you might fall
as far as you know should we what
objective should we have what objectives
should we leave
um
that is not objective yeah yeah that
that really does get down to kind of the
the nitty-gritty details of like how
this can really work with this dude like
this just kind of exploring your own
path in an educational setting
um I I have to admit that I don't know a
lot about
um the educational
um philosophy behind self-directed
education or homeschooling or any of it
regrettably
um I have a little experience with
homeschooler because of the pandemic
um and I know that um it was extremely
hard like for the for the months that we
like homeschooled like when one of our
kids
um and uh is very stressful and so like
it's you know
um that's like maybe why maybe why we we
can't just have everybody just stay home
and self-direct themselves but then that
raises the question that you're raising
which is like well well if
self-direction alone was sufficient then
it shouldn't be super hard to do this
just set people on pads and let them go
but like obviously there is a need for
constraint and guidance
um I think at least I mean like I don't
think you can just have a kid especially
a little kid just completely on their
own self-directed and they're going to
come out 10 years later like fine I
don't think it's going to be fine
um and so there's some some degree of
Need for constraint like to actually
impose something
um and say that there's some directions
we're going to force you down like which
is what the education system basically
does whole cloth right now
um and that's like delicate obviously
that balance like what where do we do
that and where do we self-direct
um and I I'm guessing that the um
you may know more than me by the way now
because I'm going into areas where
you've actually have experience but I
think I'm guessing that the answer to
that question is is basically something
that we need to explore to get better at
because like one thing that's true here
is that the degree to which
self-direction is viable without a
disaster is definitely healthy
um because what I said about
representation like the way that
representation happens in your mind
because of discovering things in a
self-directed manner is so much higher
quality and so much more flexible that
to the degree that we could actually
allow you to discover on your own rather
than sort of spoon feed it to you then
you'll actually be much better off
um but but but the danger and the
problem that the challenge is that like
probably like we can't just let you be
self-directed about everything because
like many things will never get absorbed
and you'll never go down those paths and
like that can be a huge deficit in your
life
um and so like what we need to do is
strike a balance which is extremely
delicate and in that balance though I
think is worth pursuing you know because
like like we can introduce things into
the curriculum
um and this applies to homeschool and
regular school I mean it's not
necessarily just only about
homeschooling it's like about how to
guide people
um and I think we can introduce things
that are that are like basically
um rigidly fixed into the curriculum but
they can be jumping off points right
like I mean they can be they start with
like let's plant these seeds and get
this started but hopefully we can get
you going on your own down this path and
then you can go down it
um and and I think that like to the
degree we can do that we need to
discover
um it was something we should aspire to
to be able to do that because it leads
to better understanding
um but but it's it's delicate and it's
probably also different on a different
individual basis
um and so it doesn't have a one size
fits-all like Easy Clean answer but it
doesn't mean it's not worth pursuing
um and so what that's related to like
this issue about institutional um kind
of objectives and like the way we rate
institutions because like if we're too
objective about the way that we think
about institutions like they just have
to get good scores on these tasks like
it'll totally stop them from exploring
this balance
um because they can't afford to see what
happens if you let the kids actually
just go down pads on their own because
it risks getting bad scores on the Tesla
used to evaluate the schools and then
everything's a disaster and then they're
going to lose funding and so nobody's
going to explore this issue it's not
going to happen in in the the public
setting
um and so it can happen in the the of
course the the private setting look at
the homeschooling meant but but they're
um you know then the problems might not
be scalable because like a lot of
parents just can't put the time in to
actually do this or just don't want to
um and so but whatever whatever setting
it is it's worth exploring
um to find that balance and I think it's
it's relatively underexplored as my
guess even though you may know better
than me because you've been sort of
wading into this but like I don't I
think like exploring requires like
really getting into something like when
I say exploring I mean we we hardcore
tried to get like a sense of what the
balance actually is what kids are
capable of which kids are capable of
what when and what is also inevitable
what is not inevitable like a big part
of open-ended exploration is
inevitability it doesn't get talked to
you that much but like talked about that
much but like some things like if you
restart an open-ended system like say
um like if I restarted Evolution from
scratch like on Earth or something what
would be rediscovered the second run
like would there be plants would there
be would there be uh birds flying in the
sky like like what is inevitable and
what is not and it's interesting that
some things are basically inevitable
like I think of kids as open-ended
systems very early like when they're
babies like in the sense that like they
don't have a goal of learning to walk
but they all do and so that's basically
inevitable even though effectively what
they're doing is just following pads of
interestingness like kids aren't
planning out like how am I going to
learn how to walk they just like learn
it in the process of like checking out
different things so there's inevitable
discoveries on on the road to like
Divergent exploration the longer you let
a kid explore the less inevitable things
get like you wait 10 years out and
totally different stuff is totally
unpredictable what some kid will fall
upon what some kid won't but a couple
years in like it's like they'll learn
how to talk they'll learn how to walk
like there's a lot of inevitability in
there even though they don't have any
objectives rigid objectives
um and so like the question is to the
degree to which like we can rely on
inevitability in the education system
um to allow a certain degree of freedom
in in individual exploration and I think
that that is just unknown like it hasn't
really been thought of that way
um and it's something we we benefit from
learning about
um because it's how you create like the
difference between like the people who
are Masters in something versus people
who just know about it thank you
Moritz are you ready hey yes awesome
just a quick comment on the previous
point where uh on like the systematic
change I think we talked about at the
very beginning Brian Kaplan has written
a very interesting book about the
privatization
leading to like a much more efficient
education system so if anybody's
interested
um really great book and I'm very
curious about your
sort of explanation or how you think
about the accumulation of human
knowledge where we began as like
hunter-gatherers and at some point we
picked up how to make fire and and did
into the today's world this is a much
more
I think a similar process but yeah I
think very uh badly understood but I
think the idea of this open-endedness
and um He also mentioned
yeah Gathering these Stepping Stones
yeah I'm curious what you think about
sort of accumulation of knowledge in a
sense
yeah yeah the accumulation of knowledge
which basically I call civilization
um is absolutely in my view a canonical
open-ended process in some sense it
shows that open-endedness is possible
that this even happened you know because
if you think about like open-ended is
facing my field like within machine
learning that was like my thing
open-endedness
um and
um like if you think about where we see
actual open-ended systems in nature and
then the real world
um there's not many actually it's a
pretty rare phenomenon to see true
open-ended exploration I think there's
only really two one of them is Natural
Evolution
um which is a vast open-ended search for
more than a billion years which is just
like discovered all the forms of life on
Earth from flying
um to photosynthesis to the human brain
in one run absolutely insane totally
open-ended the other one is civilization
um and so it's the it's the only other
really true example thousands of years
going from like you said things like
wheels and fire to space stations and
computers
um and there is there is the
explanations for these things are
similar
um that like what is happening in a
system like this is that stepping stones
are accumulating
um and the important thing about the
system is not that it has a goal and
obviously it doesn't
um but that it has to accumulate the
ability to accumulate Stepping Stones
the more Stepping Stones you have the
more places you can get like that's what
causes the system to become more
interesting the longer it runs so in
evolution the stepping stones of the
organisms themselves
um you know you find something like
vertebrates and then vertebrates leads
to all kinds of stuff eventually humans
um and in Civilization it's like you
find something like
um a vacuum tube and now this is a
stepping stone to lots of electrical
devices but actually to computers
because the first computers have vacuum
tubes and now this illustrates an
important point I think which is why
objective objectivity or like the
pursuit of objectives is absolutely
toxic to civilization because like if
you think about it if we had a goal if
we set a civilization-wide goal to build
the computer like before there were
computers let's say before there were
vacuum tubes let's say we go back to the
year 1800 or say 1750 before there were
any vacuum tubes and we said let's have
a goal we'll build a computer it's kind
of similar to like if today we set a
goal like a civilization-like goal to
build a time machine might be possible
who the hell knows we're not even close
we could say like it's the coolest thing
we can do let's do it but let's let's
say it was a computer back like you know
250 years ago or something well guess
what they wouldn't have invented vacuum
tubes you know because the thing is
everybody be focused on computers why
would you be looking at vacuums if there
were like more than 100 Years of
experiments had nothing to do with
computers at all so we would cut the
stepping stone out of the process
because we became myopically focused on
the objective and nothing would have
happened we have no vacuum tubes and no
computers so the reason that the system
is working the proliferation of Stepping
Stones is because it's not unified with
an objective civilization does not have
a unified objective individuals might
have objectives that are within the this
gigantic tree of ideas and some of those
are like I said totally legitimate the
way I put it like they're actually fine
because they're one stepping stone away
after other things suddenly snapped into
view
um and so like sometimes the objectives
worked out
um sometimes they were modest
um and other people just followed the
pathways of interestingness this is more
often probably the case with
revolutionary advances
um that they just realized hey this
could be really interesting views over
here I'm not even really sure what it's
going to do sometimes this is called
Serendipity Serendipity is very
important to civilization and
advancement but it's also very
non-objective because you can't like
guarantee you're going to have a
Serendipity
um and so like the the overall process
is explained by allowing us to
accumulate these stepping stones without
trying to put this unified like umbrella
imposed kind of objective over the top
of the entire process and to some extent
um I think this is continuing today this
is why civilization has not ended you
know I don't think we're into that
depressing of the situation right now it
continues but because we continue to
proliferate stepping stones but my
concern is that many of our institutions
still follow the objective principle and
what's ironic and sort of like
pathological is that a lot of these
institution institutions are actually
supposed to be fostering Innovation
that's where this gets ridiculous you
know you get to like things like funding
agencies who are funding scientific
research and they're entirely
objectively driven and so this is
completely like backwards from the way
that it should be
um and so this has happened over and
over in Labs inside of companies like
what I've wanted to focus on here the
education system totally objectively
driven but needs massive amounts of
innovation all the stepping stones have
been completely pruned out of the
education system this is why it's
stagnant for the last 30 years at least
in the U.S and why every time we come up
with a new brand of standardized tests
things don't get very much better it's
because like it's we are we're actually
creating a unified objective system so
there's no civilization anywhere it's no
longer like a Divergent path of Stepping
Stones where it's more and more powerful
the farther it goes it's now a unified
process where all the possible
interesting things have been pruned out
and now we have only one very rigid path
of Stepping Stones heading towards like
a dramatic local Optimum which we will
never escape and so this is possible to
Foster to Greater degree within the
niches where it's being I think
diminished but the good news is that I
think overall you cannot control all of
society like we cannot impose an
objective on the entire world and so
luckily there's still Divergence
happening overall and there are Pockets
where it's happening at a healthy clip
just because of like the form of like
the way certain things work um but I
think many things could be working
better for sure
um and if you look at for example
um like autocratic systems like
societies that are closed like things
that really are objectively driven like
the way like they don't have much
advancement going on you know they're
top down control they're very objective
like somebody's deciding what we should
do like that's why we don't see a lot of
progress in those kind of uh societies
um and so yeah I think like the the
liberalization of society in the sense
of like allowing many kind of living
flowers to bloom
um is part of the march of civilization
and essential like to continue progress
workers
thanks
awesome all right Henrik go ahead
yeah yeah of course I wanted to make a
comment on on the question Justin had
and about sort of um the trade-off
between open-endedness sensitive
constraining kids and that sort of and I
also sort of work into homeschooling
community and uh sort of two two
parameters that you can sort of work
with is sort of one easy if you can
delay how soon you add objectives
because then you allow more people to
sort of find their way there on sort of
open-ended search and then you sort of
um catch those that do not which is sort
of close to what you call talked about
like catching the things that failed and
the other one is sort of constructing
the sort of cultural Media or the social
environment that people around so they
get role models and that kind of sort of
inspires them so those are sort of two
things you can work with uh and you can
comment on that if you want but I had
the question I had a question do you
want to comment on that before I ask a
question oh that's okay those are good
points that's interesting thanks
um yeah I'll let you get to your point
yeah
so so you were talking about and you
mentioned like shortly in the book
when you're talking about like on the
institutional level like uh the peer
review and how sort of ideas will spread
as a sort of an alternative to
standardized testing
um
I want to see if you can still talk
about it more sort of General uh about
like um how
one can go about sort of structuring
social networks in a way that sort of
Fosters Innovation and sort of uh what
we can sort of think about when we we're
creating these systems to to to Foster
Innovation and the network topology
yeah and I guess I'll I'll ground it in
the educational system since that's kind
of like the The Guiding topic too like
maybe just think about think about the
education system which I basically think
of as encompassing teachers like think
about it as a social network
um so there's teachers in different
classrooms and different schools and
different cities and countries and
um they've all got unique problems
um some overlapping some less
overlapping
um and they all are facing uh the the
hope to help these kids learn
um and so like we're in that situation
uh what how should we structure the
network um in a way that actually causes
things uh to progress in in a way that's
actually healthy for everybody
um and so what one thing here is that
the solution to our problems there's as
many problems in educating kids
um is extremely a complex and
multifaceted is sort of my assumption so
it's not one stepping set away in other
words like there are a number of
stepping stones that probably have to
cross to understand everything that we
hope to understand to really make this
work well for everybody so we're in a
complex search space
um and so the the kids in the classes
um are facing all these challenges and
the teachers are facing challenges and
sort of getting around them
um and this will require creativity
um we have to try different things and
that means risk suddenly comes up like
some things won't work
um and now we Face a very Stark problem
right because like it's essential that
um that that kids learn like nobody
should be a victim of the fact that
we're trying to be open-ended like oh
well you know well everybody at this
cooler nothing their their education but
at least we learned that doesn't work
like that's not acceptable this
constrains our ability to accept risk
you know like in some areas we can
accept more risk than others
um and so that's part of like sure just
being realistic about all this like you
know for example like like engineering
Society to be different is quite risky
you know we can't afford to like explore
all the different forms of society
um there's some of these who could lead
in Mass death
um and and so it's just not worth it
even though we might learn something
really useful
um education isn't quite at their level
of like massive death but it is true
that like we have some constraints uh
honest
um and that makes this this hard but but
I think we are too risk-averse at the
moment um and I think that um if we
can't afford to have some failure here
just because something doesn't work
doesn't mean that someone's going to
learn nothing for the rest of their
entire life
um we can try some things and in fact we
have to if we want Improvement because
again this is a complex airspace and so
it requires a degree of open-ended
search to actually find what the
interesting stepping stones are who is
going to find those interesting Stepping
Stones well the teachers they have to be
the one they're the ones actually doing
the educating the teachers this is
interesting because we don't trust them
well why do we why don't we trust how do
I know we don't trust them because we
have all these standardized tests like
if we trusted them they could create
their own tests and they could figure
out on their own like how to make sure
that the kids learn but we don't trust
them
um so you have to make sure like
everything has now been sort of like
top-down organized like we know what the
curriculum is we know what everybody
should know at what point in time
everything is in lockstep
um and so like the first thing is that
the teachers need to have some latitude
towards creativity try some things now
this goes back to what I said about
educating somebody for 20 30 years and
then just like giving up on it like
obviously the teachers know something
about what the problems are like that's
like basically what they do for their
entire lives now there are separate
issues about like whether the teachers
themselves are poorly educated or like
bad quality or something that's a
separate problem I mean we should honor
teachers I think because they're so
important to the advance of civilization
if we don't we'll get bad teachers but
I'm assuming we have good teachers here
like look at if we have teachers who are
competent know what's going on then we
need them to be able to explore they
have to try stuff that isn't crazy I
mean teachers know about education
they've been doing it
um so like allowing them to try some
things that's okay we should be able to
do that that means some creativity even
maybe they try some things that someone
else wouldn't do and we find that
actually is a good idea because they
thought it was interesting maybe it
wasn't a good idea well we can move on
and not do that anymore
um now we'll get into the network
Mission so let's say that some teacher
tries something and it does work it
works really well like they actually
found out that this is kind of
interesting or there's another thing
let's say somebody tried something and
actually test scores did not improve but
something interesting happened like
maybe the kids who were doing bad stop
doing bad but the kids who are doing
well no longer doing as well or
something interesting there's some
change in the distribution that's also
interesting information we're learning
something all learning is not always
about improving scores
um and so like the issue there is that
whenever as something interesting
happens will the word get out like if
it's only that one teacher nobody else
finds out about it well this stepping
stone is effectively not a stepping
stone like no one can actually Traverse
from that stepping stone other than that
single teacher which is unlikely that
they're going to cross all the following
paths that might be interesting what we
need to do in order to have an
open-ended system is to expose people to
the stepping stones that again by the
way goes back to civilization like the
reason civilization works is because we
do get exposed to many Stepping Stones
like many of the inventions in the world
are exposed to us and exposed to us
increasingly rapidly rapidly thanks to
for example the internet which is a kind
of a social network and that means that
things can move more rapidly forward but
it's the exposure to the Stepping Stones
to the people who could actually act on
them which is the important Catalyst
that allows the entire system to work
for as an Innovative system so we don't
have that at all interestingly in the
education system like the teachers have
it may have it first of all they're
stopped from having interesting ideas
because they're inside of this
standardized test Loop but even if they
had an interesting idea it's not going
to go anywhere because there is no
network there's no exposure to that
stepping stone it'll be just lost
especially if it's only interesting and
not raising your score you know and
there's lots of stuff like that like
things that change in a way that's
interesting like people are
multi-dimensional kids are highly
multi-dimensional there's many
interesting things that can happen other
than a score going up they could be
really interesting for people to know
about but none of that stuff will
Traverse through the social network even
if there was a social network but
problem number one is there is it so
what should we do well like we I think
we can actually intertwine the issue of
having uh like a minimum of Standards
with having like ideas percolate through
a system I think we can combine those
two things so problem number one is
you're all gonna like I say you're all
I'm talking about I'm talking to the
administrators out there you're all
gonna freak out because I'm basically
saying let teachers do whatever they
want just because they think it's
interesting then you're gonna be like oh
my God like we have no control over
anything anymore like bad things are
going to happen all over the place kids
won't learn like are gonna get bad
scores but the reason you don't have to
freak out so much is look we can still
have some degree of oversight like it's
not like you can't do anything let's do
it though in a social network like to a
large extent this is how science works
like in the scientific field like you
try to write a paper and the way it goes
is like it goes to a bunch of reviewers
it doesn't go to the entire world and
there's no standard thing that you can
do like to review your paper you don't
send it to like some standard committee
which is like knows like whether it was
good paper or not you send it to like a
peer review it might be three or four
peer reviewers and they'll write views
of the paper what's interesting about
the system is not only did you get
feedback back from the peer reviewers
but the peer reviewers also learned
about your ideas so the idea is already
spreading to The Social Network thanks
to the peer review system we could do
this with teachers I mean basically it
would be a totally different thing
though because the teacher wouldn't just
have some test scores and if you think
about it the test scores are ridiculous
because they reduce this extremely
multi-dimensional thing like probably
thousands of interesting Dimensions down
to a single score it's like this is how
all my class did like everybody got an
average of like 47 on the standardized
test like none of the other information
is out there at all like nobody can look
at it no one has any idea what's really
going on like so instead think about it
more like a peer review system where the
teacher actually documents what they're
thinking it's like I tried these things
like this is why I tried those things
they were interesting because I did this
this was justified because XYZ like it's
not a crazy thing to do like maybe it
didn't work but I'll explain to you why
and what I did to fix that um because
yeah ultimately it is my job to get
these kids to learn so if something
doesn't work I can't just continue down
that path I have to actually have these
kids learn so we have minimum standards
like the people aren't just falling off
into the deep end
um but then like I realized like that
that like I'm actually just sending
assembling effectively like a paper or a
package like it might include some
scores I'm not saying we don't do any
testing ever like I'm not saying abolish
test they're part of the dimensions like
in there like they're part of our
understanding of what's going on but I
try different things and I explain them
then that will be sent out through a
network to some peers like peer review
um hopefully it's disseminated in a
principled way so it's like maybe we
should try to find teachers that are in
situations something like if you're in
an inner city school maybe some of your
peer reviewers should be Inner City
Teachers probably but not all because
actually sometimes like oblique
connections are the most interesting you
know it's like someone in a different
field knows something you don't know and
actually turns out to be very relevant
to you so we don't want it to be just
only all like sort of siled in this way
but we should have some degree of
similarity and some degree of diversity
as we like assemble this network and
then the peer reviewers job is to
basically say number one if there's
something absolutely horrible flag it so
that like it can be maybe if there is
some sort of like top-down system like
it can enter at that point like if
something horrible is happening we can
intervene number two like just give back
feedback and this isn't to prevent
horrible things but to cause everybody
to see more interesting possibilities
it's like oh you thought of that and
maybe it didn't quite work how you
wanted but I've done this and actually
this might actually help with what you
were doing actually if you combine those
something like that that comes back
through the network now ideas are
percolating through the network
um and people are getting exchanging
ideas back and forth
um and so now like the the other thing
that happens is now this this teacher
here gets the information from the
reviewers
um so now they're being influenced by
the network
um and I think like we could set up a
network like that like it's not even I
haven't even talked about the technical
aspect because like with the internet
and social actual social networks like
it's you know it's conceivable we could
do this in a technical manner so that
it's basically set up in a way that's
like principled to be like fast
efficient like make sense diversity is
being checked in a way that's systematic
like we could do these things on purpose
if we had the will instead of spending
whatever billions we spend on the
standardized testing industry you could
spend it on this I'm sure we could set
up a network
um that would be able to facilitate this
kind of exchange and what would happen
is ideas would percolate through the
system there would be no universal view
no one would know everything that's
going on nobody would say like oh the
this is the you know this is the test
level of the country right now I mean
you could still say it but it would be
irrelevant to the network
um it would be just dissemination of
ideas through a network percolating
around and I if there's Big Ideas
they'll get big that's what happens in
Civilization right like the iPhone came
out and everybody has one
um and so like that's gonna happen it's
going to happen naturally and
organically you don't need to worry
about it that's how these things work
um things will explode when they're
really interesting they don't have to be
good they could be just interesting but
some of them will also be good
um so I think it's worth that's what I
advocate I think we should be doing
um that's how the system should work the
reason it doesn't work that way is
because we don't trust each other at all
we don't trust teachers to look at each
other in a way other than just a score
we don't trust people to say oh what's
interesting about your idea like that's
invalid in our view we need the
objective security blanket we can't do
anything without it we're completely
paralyzed because of it and that's why
this educational system is paralyzed and
going to be going nowhere
foreign so I'm curious Ken uh we're
coming up to around two hours do you
have uh time for one or two more
questions is that okay
yeah one or two more questions yeah this
is I'm glad we got to get into some
detail so yeah I'll take one or two more
questions yeah awesome awesome all right
you Leo go ahead
thank you
what I find is um
sort of hindrance to
non-objective-based searches uh kind of
open-ended exploration
that
uh are kind of like
implicit objectives you still carry over
like a sense of urgency about time and
sort of needing to arrive somewhere even
though you've
changed you've committed to just
exploring interesting things
uh
so
I wonder
how do you serve kind of adapt
to a new mindset where you can
sort of have a sense where you're going
on this journey and you might go on
different side paths and take your time
to explore those as opposed to the sense
of urgency where things need to get done
they need to get done fast and I need to
get somewhere uh it's like uh
I'm sorry it's a bit rambling my
question I hope you understand yeah I
totally understand it I mean it's um
it's like the challenge that we all face
I think
um that like in in principle it sounds
good I'm sure it's like oh it's
liberating let's let's follow what we
find interesting like I bet everybody
here if they did that would eventually
find something really interesting but
then we we run into reality and we're
like wait a second like I've got bills
to pay I've got things I have to do I've
got like Milestones that I'm supposed to
reach you know my employer my school
whatever it is like I I can't really do
this like this doesn't really make any
sense or like even like life Milestones
or like I like it's like you know I I
need to get a job I need to get married
um you know it's I I need I need to get
a home
um and and like that's that's gonna
that's gonna inhibit you from from doing
this like this is the free spirit
um
this is when you're not afraid like
people who follow Paths of interesting
are fearless and it interacts with the
fact that it involves risk so it's like
it's not the case that the fact that you
feel you're in a rush and have to do
something is somehow illegitimate it
actually is legitimate like you actually
are at risk because of the fact you need
to do something
um there's real risks involved here
um and so like it's just like we have to
accept that we're constrained in the
degree to which we can just like
idealistically follow this philosophy
and it depends on your life
circumstances if you're a billionaire
and uh you got nothing to do like you
can't afford to be like this that's like
the ideal case
um but like most people are not in this
situation
um and by the way it's not only about
money I mean it's like even if you're a
billionaire and you like you have like
total freedom to do things sort of
professionally you still have a family
and stuff like everybody's got things
they're worried about you know and so
like all of us have some degree of
constraint on being a complete free
spirit
um and so like that has to be knowledge
that like it's just like reality is
reality
um and so what what this offers I think
is a little bit of um release from just
like the paranoia that it's reached you
know I think that's what it's offering
it's not offering something so huge that
it's going to like utterly change the
way you run your life but it's basically
that like you know maybe you're a little
bit too worried about all this stuff
because like you've got no channels to
just express yourself and be who you are
when you follow the interesting and that
that is also like a huge mistake just as
it's a huge mistake to forget about all
your risks and go crazy but it's a huge
mistake to give yourself no channels to
self-expression because I think of sort
of following interestingness as a form
of self-expression
um and so like yeah actually the the
thing that should release you is the
idea that it's actually principled
because the problem I think is that we
think of it as not principled we think
of it as like kind of like special time
you know it's like the time where we
just do stuff that's pointless or
useless it's like you know the 20 20
percent time or something at Google or
something it's like the time that's not
productive like we're gonna go but the
thing that I'm saying here is like look
the the empirical results support
um that like actually like those kinds
of behaviors are the ones that actually
lead to the most amazing things so
you're not unprincipled by doing it
um it's just that yes it is likely that
it won't work
um but if you keep doing it eventually
you're more likely to find something
that does work that is really
interesting and work doesn't necessarily
mean you make a billion dollars it might
mean you just do something very
satisfying to yourself personally who
knows what you're going to discover
um but like it it is the only way that
you're going to have those kinds of
experiences is to take a little bit of
risk and so like you got to make room
some room for risk and it depends on
your personal situation and your the
room you have for risk and it's true
that like people who are living in dire
circumstances can't afford to do this
you know to accept that
um like if it's a life and death every
day
um and you're starving like you know you
can't afford to just be like well I
wonder if I walk down this path where
I'll be like it's just like no time for
that
um so like the best thing to do if you
really really want to live a life like
this is put yourself in a position where
you have less risk
um like get in a position where you're
somewhat comfortable it could take some
risks
um and obviously that's easier said than
done
um but there's certain jobs that support
like like I said like becoming a
professor for me like it definitely
helped mitigate research risk I mean so
you kind of part of the job is to take
some risks with research like even
though there though you'll find that
like there's lots of professors who
don't want to take research risk because
they're afraid like they're measured on
metrics too they have like publication
measures like the whole world is
ridiculously objective so I'm not saying
like you'll just go to find some like
like you know there's not just some
dream job where everything's protected
and you don't have to worry no matter
where you'll go you'll face this problem
but there are some places where it's
less than others is the point
um and like you got to find that path if
you really want to get like free and
liberated
um then like you've got to find a place
where you have like some some room for
risk in the area you're interested in
other areas you don't have to take risks
just take them in the in your areas
where you're interested in and and then
even though you will always face risk
you know give yourself like a little bit
of room to do it because it's not so bad
like you know the other areas of your
life aren't going to All Fall Apart
um and it is principled and you're
justified in doing it because it is
principled
um so it's worth doing that's how
anything interesting is going to happen
yeah sorry guys
Kristen on
um education system sort of the
economics of it where I wonder like I
think right now we have this like very
state-funded model and I think like
personally ideally I think something we
have something very Market driven
although I'm also not times unsure if
that's the most optimal because then I
think everything is optimized for like
the value an employee can generate at
the end of the day but I would be
interested how we can measure these
open-ended
potential education system sort of the
ideal system how could we measure and
allocate the resources based on which
which one works the best
yeah
um this is yeah I'm also not sure like I
just easily solved by like going to a
private system or something
um right like the health system in the
U.S is like you know semi-private and
there's all kinds of problems
um and so
um so it's very complex
um and so like the question of
yeah how to allocate the resources
um
to or actually yeah how would you phrase
your question
just to make sure yeah how to measure an
effective open ended education system I
see I see yeah thanks that so this gets
to a paradox because like everything I'm
saying is anti-measurement
you know like measurements go hand in
hand with with objectives like as soon
as you have a measurement you have an
objective or as soon as you have an
objective usually a measurement is
following how do I know I'm going
towards my objective I'll measure it
great
um this is what leads us astray because
the problem is it's very hard to measure
whether you're moving towards a complex
objective we don't actually know what to
measure like how would you measure
whether you're getting closer to
developing a computer in the year 1600
it's like there's nothing to measure
like you need vacuum tubes but like that
won't make the measure go up at all
because there's nothing to do with
compute as far as we can see
um so you can't measure things like in
this kind of a non-objective system like
a system where like you don't know what
the stepping stones are and you're far
away and so like one of the most
paradoxical problems of all is to say to
measure open-endedness itself
um because it's like you're you're
talking about things that are almost the
opposite of each other but yet it comes
up over and over so it's worth
addressing because actually like in the
field of open-endedness within machine
learning it also it's in with the field
of art there's another field called
artificial life where also people care a
lot about open-endedness it comes up
over and over again everybody wants to
know how to measure it and measurement
is also tied to definition so like you
can't measure something you can't Define
it so like there's endless argument
about what is the definition of
open-endedness so that we can measure it
um and uh what is the measure like to
tell us whether it's a good open-ended
system not a good open-ended like
there's been proposed measures
um I'm not saying you could apply these
in life but but for some artificial
systems like for example there's
something called activity statistics
it's proposed by uh Mark Bedell and it
was um like an attempt to measure
open-endedness
um and I would say that like no measure
yet is fully satisfying
um actually how it goes first thing no
measure yet is it all satisfying like
there's no good measures yet um from
from a formal kind of machine learning
perspective it's just really hard to say
that something is just generally
speaking is open-ended one of the
problems is that like it's ultimately I
think subjective whether you're
satisfied with an open-ended system
because you have to at the end of they
decide what you find interesting and
we're back to that again now like what
do we find interesting like was
Evolution successfully open-ended well I
think it's extremely successful like
evolution in nature like it's just super
interesting but that's just my opinion I
mean I can't prove to you like you could
easily make an argument where you say
like everything that happened since the
very first cell is of no consequence
whatsoever in the grand scheme of
reality
um like what does it matter the universe
is going to end
um like a bunch of stuff happened it's
all going to go back to just vapor and
then it'll be over
um I don't believe that at all but
that's my opinion I don't think this is
based on fact this is just I feel that
this is a very interesting phenomenon
that's going on most people would agree
I think but it's not because it can be
formalized I don't think and so this
leaves us I think with a real quandary
like when it comes to measuring the
success of the open-ended system
um and I think that um
what what I think we need to actually
ultimately get away from the idea that
it can be measured and moved towards the
idea that it can be discussed at this
level
um very uncomfortable ground probably a
discussion without a measure like what
are we doing here we're all going crazy
um but I think that we have to do this
like when it comes to Innovation because
there's no final grounding and no final
Arbiter about whether something is
moving in a good direction from an
open-ended or Innovative perspective
before you've seen the result we can
also you know obviously congratulate
ourselves when everybody is scoring 100
on their tests at that point it's over
like then we'll be happy
um but like when it isn't there like how
do we know whether things are working
well if you start saying well I need to
know that we're moving towards everybody
getting 100 on our tests we're back to
having an objective system the very
slippery ground to be able to do this
now I think we can have local
measurement like that is possible
there's a whole field called quality
diversity which basically causes local
competitions that actually are
objectively measured but globally
there's no competition so there's no
Global metric that's like super feeding
the whole thing you can have some of
that and not destroy the process so
there can be some sort of like objective
measurement going on like for example
test scores can be part of something but
like globally speaking I don't think you
can have a full objective measure you
can have things that are sort of
measures of like how diverse the system
is but again it's going to be subjective
at some level like what is diversity
based on it's based on a measure of
novelty and then we're back to that
again like what do we think is important
but I would say ultimately like do some
do some measurements like that to come
up with some diversity metrics like it's
okay it'll be subjective to some extent
but we can still do some measurement if
we agree if we have some consensus about
this
um but we're gonna have to discuss it
like ultimately like we're gonna have to
engage with the the the unpleasant like
nasty aspect of reality which is that is
complex and like the funny thing is like
of course it's complex like that's why
it's such a problem to us like this
isn't like there's no way around the
fact it's going to be messy
um to actually like engage with this and
like the way I think of objectives is
like just an excuse to not engage with
the complexity of the system like
objectives are basically an excuse to
just dump all of your knowledge and
experience out the window just look at a
graph and decide like it's good or not
um and it's basically just excusing you
for like basically having no knowledge
whatso to have no knowledge whatsoever
yeah go get your PhD like spend 30 years
like learning about some field and then
at the end of the day we don't care what
you actually think about something it's
just only whether the graph is going up
and this happens like this is the way
like in the review like the review
Systems of papers like it often works
that way you'll get Highly Educated
people who are supposed experts in the
field and they'll dismiss an entire
paper just because that you didn't
compare it to Method y I don't know if
your method's better I don't have to
engage with your ideas talk about
whether they're interesting doesn't
matter I can just say you haven't
compared to this that's an objective
measure come back when you do and we
haven't even engaged with the material
at all at some level at the level of
Education as a whole across the entire
world we're gonna have to engage at some
point like the reason there's no
progress is there's no engagement and
that means discussing what's interesting
like what is actually matters to us what
do we think are the paths that matter
and I submit that like if really
experienced highly qualified people who
know about the field get into a sincere
discussion with each other where they're
being honest about like trying to
actually talk about this rather than
just shut each other down we might
actually make some progress like we
actually could say whether we're happy
with how things are going and whether
this open-ended system as a whole is a
system of value
maybe one way out of the progress is not
to phrase the question as how to measure
effective and effective open and
education system but how to or what
makes that system interesting or
um discuss
the
I don't know is there some like
conclusion we can draw on how to
resolve the paradox
yeah no I think that's a good move yeah
like like if we can talk about what
makes the problem interesting
or maybe we could say what makes this
you know system healthy or something
like it's educational things are like
ideas are moving around in a healthy way
this looks good oh yeah I think we can
discuss that like we should be able to
discuss that like also like how can we
tell like are things moving around like
what what is can we have a view of the
network like there's a like a Global
Network here
um like who period reviewed whom like
there is some way to see this like
there's too many to view it all at once
with your eyes for example so maybe we
can analyze in other ways like whether
whether there's a good distribution of
ideas moving back and forth
um
we can look at like anecdotal examples
like throughout the network like are all
the good ideas in one corner of this and
like is everything else is stagnant from
maybe from the point of view of the
participants
um like there are different things we
could ask
um and that's worth discussing I think
it gets into the to the minutia but it's
worth discussing
awesome do we have time for one more I
know Justin's uh been sitting there
waiting
all right yeah let's do the last this
could be the last question yeah this
absolutely last question go ahead Justin
okay
yeah and not so much a question just to
go off on what Moritz was saying uh and
and maybe an observation to tag out of
that
um you talked about the system as you
know
maybe there should be some minimum
criteria that's set and then you know uh
space for open-ended is on on top of
that and so maybe those maybe those
minimal criteria and those are the
things that you kind of centrally set so
those are the things you you have set
measurements for those are some things
we actually could measure uh and then uh
everything on top of that the open-ended
is you know maybe that's something that
is more of a decentralized uh system we
don't really measure it we more observe
it and then uh you know see that you
know through different Market forces
which which way people are gravitating
you know
um there's other feedback mechanisms
that people are looking for on the
individual level like does my kid like
to go to school am I fighting them every
day to get out the door or are they like
this is awesome I'm going to learn about
this you know those are the things you
won't be really be able to centrally
measure but you can observe the way that
that people are reacting to the system
um
you know maybe in a more open-ended
system like that so so if if we find
some sort of combination between a
measurement and an observational uh of
the decentralized system that's on top
of that
yeah yeah I totally I totally agree with
that I think
um the minimal Criterion is very
important
um both uh because like it is true that
we need to we need to have some minimum
standard like we don't want something to
collapse this is not a case where we can
afford that risk like people need to
learn but also because it does pacify
all these objective uh obsessed people
who can't stand not having something
objective to look at it's like what we
do have at least you have this score but
the trick is there's a trick though
going on there which is that like it's
not a measure of progress you see what
those people really want is a measure of
progress they want to see a gradient
where you're going up minimal criterions
don't go up they just stay minimum
um like you're not trying to find out if
things are improving through the middle
criteria you're just trying to make sure
that things don't collapse into a level
that's unacceptable so it's a floor
um it's not a gradient
um and this is a very uh I think uh
unintuitive or counter-intuitive concept
for most people who are used to like
modern assessment I don't think in terms
of minimal criteria like that that that
is uncomfortable but because they want
to actually have a gradient to follow
like this measurement is for but they
won't really be able to tell the
difference because they don't even
really understand why they're doing what
they're doing or what the toxic effects
are so I think to some extent it'll
it'll make people feel a little better
that there's a minimal Criterion I mean
obviously like in this fantasy like this
is like they're absolutely revolutionary
if you really really reorganize the
education system in this way I'm not
delusional this is going to happen
anytime soon but if we did like yeah
there would be minimal criteria I think
I think it's it's important for the
system and it's also going to make
people feel a little better that there's
some objectivity
um going on and so that's totally right
and then that that I think Works hand in
hand with like what you said about like
whether the kind of open-endedness is
working at an interesting
interestingness level whether we like
what's happening locally and to some
extent globally like what people are
saying you got to look at all the
dimensions it's very multi-dimensional
um but that will lead to
um a kind of a minimal Criterion search
which actually is a name for things like
we had algorithms like minimal criteria
novelty search like in AI like use this
idea I was for a long time fascinated
with minimal criteria from an
algorithmic perspective because it sort
of creates this floor that you could
never crash through and then everything
else is sort of open
um it's actually pretty interesting so
it's actually a principal thing to have
a minimal Criterion search
um and I think it's conceivable whether
it will happen I don't know but it's
certainly conceivable to construct the
system that way and probably is the
right the right version of the system
like for like really finding cool stuff
and by the way like if this was the
system like I think Evolution I mean
education would be just way more
pleasurable for every everyone like you
said dude my kids want to go to school
can I get my kids out the door
kids are getting much like more like a
system where things are being tailored
to them interesting things are being
tried everything's not the same every
year everything's not regimented into
standardized tests you're not considered
a complete failure if like you don't get
the score you want the school isn't
considered a failure like the world will
open up it would be so much more
pleasurable like people will be pursuing
things because they're actually
interesting like that'll be encouraged
sometimes
um like it would be a much more a
beautiful world I think for everybody
involved
awesome okay we're so grateful for you
uh giving up your time to speak with us
today I mean it was it was a lot of fun
we don't get an opportunity to do this
uh very often uh so thank you so much
and I'm really grateful to Henrik for
helping organize this and arranging the
the events and to everyone for their
excellent questions I mean pretty much
like every single question uh led to an
amazing interesting discussion with uh
similar stuff to think about later and I
know I'll be loading up the video once
it's up on YouTube to uh go back and
take notes on some of the sections so
I'm just really grateful Ken is there
anywhere like we should go online to
follow you or any Social Media stuff uh
how can we help get the message out
about uh the power of non-objective
search and so on
yeah
um well I should also just just Echo
what you said I mean thank you and and
the questions were great and I really
appreciated the long form of this like
to be able to get into depth I mean it
took a couple hours but it allowed us to
really get into depth and it was nice to
get these thoughts out because I haven't
had the opportunity so thank you for
setting that up and for people asking
these really probing questions
um in terms of following me
um uh you can go to like I put up a
website recently kenstanley.net
um if you want to find the contact info
um I have a Twitter you can find it
there
um that that's also there uh it's
Kenneth zero Stanley basically on
Twitter
um and
um
that also um by the way like I'm gonna
start a company that's going to try to
deal with some of this stuff maybe worth
mentioning that nobody knows about it
yet haven't really mentioned it uh much
and um it's not uh it's not even named
um but that's something you could follow
um going forward sort of try to increase
Serendipity in general that's what the
company will do
oh man oh it's very exciting is there
any like uh hints as to what the company
is going to be doing or is that kind of
open uh to be discovered
um we're gonna try to create a system
um that's basically like uh a
Serendipity Network
um where Serendipity will be maximized
in the system
um but I guess I'll leave it at that oh
man yeah that's awesome yeah well
hopefully we can have you back at some
point to uh maybe once the company is
launched or something like that to
discuss it and see how it's going
that'd be great yeah it looked amazing
all right well thank you guys for coming
out uh I guess I'll end it here uh yeah
see you all next time thank you so much
thank you
see you guys